January 2016  
 
 
Ali A. Mazrui Memorial Library 
12th January 2016 
 
Presentation for the Official Launch Of The MEWA Library - Mombasa By the US Ambassador to Kenya. 
Library named in Honor of 
Prof Ali A. Mazrui (1933-2014) 
 
By 
Ghalib Yusuf Tamim 
Mazrui's Family Representative 
 
 
 
  
The US Ambassador to Kenya - H. E. Robert Godec 
The Governor of Mombasa County - H. E. Hassan Joho 
The Chairman of Muslim Education Welfare Association - Mr. Salim Ghalgan All protocols observed. 
  
On behalf of Prof Ali Al'Amin Mazrui's Family, both in Kenya and the USA, I wish to sincerely thank MEWA and the US Embassy in Kenya for bestowing this honor of naming the library     "Ali A. Mazrui Memorial Library."  
 This is the third library in the world honoring Mazrui: 
1.      The IIIT Library in the US. Prof Mazrui was a Life Member of the International Institute of 
Islamic Thought - a US based institute that has brought together Muslim social Scientists. Prof Mazrui donated his works - books and papers to IIIT Library as reference materials for Researchers. 
2.      The Library of Congress, again in the US. They have a Mazrui Corner for books and papers on Prof Mazrui. 
3.      And today we are launching the MEWA "Ali A. Mazrui Memorial Library in Mombasa, Kenya. 
 
Prof Mazrui today at this function is being honored by both Kenya and USA. 
 
Prof Mazrui lived for more than 30 years in the USA as a Permanent Resident while maintain his Kenyan citizenship. It is only in the last 3 years of his life that he became a Dual-Citizen of Kenya and USA. In fact, Prof Mazrui considered himself a Global Citizen and that is why he initiated the "Institute of Global Cultural Studies - IGCS" at Binghamton University, State University of New York. 
 
When I read the banner, "Passing of an Era", I remembered the tribute of Mohamed bin Yusuf to Prof Mazrui - Mazrui's nephew in Toronto, Canada: 
 
"The Ancestors of all three persuasions are claiming victory! A loud voice uttered. The voice was reverberating in every corner of 'After-Africa'. Victory?! Victory?! Victory for what?! Christopher Okigbo asked astonishingly. The Ancestors responded, 'Victory for having convinced our son, Prof Ali Al'Amin Mazrui, who is known as The Walking Triple Heritage in the 'Here-before' to finally re-unite with us". 
 
In death, Mazrui's Legacy lives on with the honor that is being bestowed on him today. 
 
I would like to share with you Ms. Ravenna-Norizzano Bronson's tributes to Mazrui. Ravenna was Prof Mazrui's Administrative Assistant at Binghamton University, SUNY: 
 
I sat and clenched my fists, 
Fought back tears - my eyes burned red, 
Until I heard a voice within, 
And this is what she said, 
She said, 
"Ali Al'Amin Mazrui is a peaceful warrior, 
Not by fist or sword, 
But Mwalimu Mazrui is a peaceful warrior, 
And this cannot be ignored." 
 
My boss - Dr. Ali Al'Amin Mazrui was  
A peaceful warrior, 
Not by fist or sword (or gun, or bomb, or drone, Or lethal injection), 
Prof Mwalimu Mazrui was a  
Peaceful warrior like Gandhi, And this cannot be ignored. 
 
Long live Ali A. Mazrui Memorial Library! 
Long live Prof Mazrui's Legacy! 
 
Thank you! 
  
Prof. Awadh Binhazim (DVC Technical University -2nd left). Ghalib Tamim (Family Rep), Sh. Hammad Kassim (Ex-Chief Kadhi of Kenya),         
US Ambassador to Kenya Robert Godec (centre - Guest of Honor) and Mombasa County Governor Ali Hassan Joho (2nd right) 
