
 
Ali A. Mazrui Senior Fellow in Global African Studies 
 
ABOUT NAMESAKE SCHOLAR ALI A. MAZRUI  
 
Ali A. Mazrui, world-renowned Kenyan-born scholar, passed away at the age of 81 on October 12, 2014, in Binghamton (New York) where he was the Albert Schweitzer Professor in the Humanities and Founding Director of the Institute of Global Cultural Studies at 
Binghamton University. For over two decades 
Professor Mazrui was affiliated to Cornell 
University, first as Andrew D. White Professor-atLarge and later as Andrew D. White Professor-atLarge Emeritus and also Senior Scholar in the Africana Studies and Research Center.  
Professor Mazrui earned his BA from Manchester University in England, his MA from Columbia University, and his doctorate from Oxford University.  His early specialization in political science was later expanded to include various fields in the social sciences and the humanities. 
Dr. Mazrui's professional career was launched in the early 1960s at Makerere 
University, (Kampala, Uganda) where he served as head of the Department of Political Science and Dean of the Faculty of the Social Sciences. He has also served as Chancellor of the Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology in 
Kenya, Ibn Khaldun Professor-at-Large, Graduate School of Islamic and Social 
Sciences, Leesburg, Virginia. He was also Walter Rodney Professor at the University of Guyana and Albert Luthuli Professor-at-Large at the University of Jos in Nigeria. Dr. Mazrui also served as Visiting Scholar at Stanford, Chicago, Colgate, 
Singapore, Australia, Malaysia, Oxford, Harvard, Bridgewater, Cairo, Leeds, 
Nairobi, Tehran, Denver, London, Ohio State, Baghdad, McGill, Sussex, Pennsylvania, amongst others, and was a recipient of honorary doctorates from several universities worldwide. 
In 2005 the American journal, Foreign Policy (Washington, DC), and the British Journal, Prospect (London), nominated him as one of the top 100 public intellectuals alive in the world.   
Dr. Mazrui authored over thirty books and hundreds of articles published across five continents. He served on the editorial boards of more than twenty international scholarly journals, and his television work includes the widely discussed nine-part 1986 documentary The Africans: A Triple Heritage (BBC and  

 
PBS). A book by the same title jointly published by BBC Publications and Little, Brown and Company was a best seller in Britain in 1986. 
He served in the leadership positions of several academic organizations including Vice President of the International Political Science Association, Vice President of the International Congress of African Studies, Vice President of the Royal Africa Society in London, President of the African Studies Association-USA, and President of the Association of Muslim Social Scientists in North America. 
Dr. Mazrui's services to the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the African Union include membership of the Group of Eminent Persons appointed in 1992 by the OAU Presidential Summit to explore the issues of African Reparations for Enslavement and Colonization. He was also among the Eminent Personalities who advised on the transition from the OAU to the African Union in 2002. 
Dr. Mazrui was involved in a number of United Nations projects on matters ranging from human rights to nuclear proliferation. He also served as expert advisor to the United Nations Commission on Transnational Corporations and as Special Advisor to the World Bank. Dr. Mazrui was also engaged in many discussions with Heads of State in Africa, Asia, and elsewhere. 
 
 
