Editorial
Ali A. Mazrui, IIIT, and theMuslim Experience in theUnited States of America
This editorial is dedicated to paying a tribute to Professor Ali A. Mazrui, whopassed away in Binghamton, New York, on October 13, 2014. From 2009(this journal. In years to come, we may consider dedicating a special issue tohim and his general intellectual contributions. But for now, we present the fol-lowing tribute penned by his friend and colleague, Professor Sulayman S.Nyang (Howard University, Washington, DC), as published in IIIT "SpecialIssue: Farewell Professor Ali Mazrui" (October 2014). AJISS 26:1) until his passing, Professor Mazrui was the editor-in-chief for
and effectively. It is against this background that one can examine a profile ofProfessor Ali A. Mazrui, the celebrated scholar, author, and public intellectualfrom Kenya came, performed, and departed gracefully. Certainly, those whoknew him well gladly fared him well, knowing beyond reasonable doubt thathe had the nerve and the verve to represent both Islam and Africa faithfully
the man and his legacies within many domains in America, the Islamic world,and in the larger world.out of an Afro-Arab ancestry that affected his life at home and overseas. As itBorn on February 24, 1933, in Mombasa, Kenya, Professor Mazrui came who arranged a scholarship for him to study in England, Ali A. Mazrui com-is now well known, through the intervention of a British colonial governor
University, Professor Mazrui was destined to develop multiple linkages withYork was the beginning of a lifetime association with American and other thinktanks and foundations around the world. From his association with Columbiato Manchester University, where he completed his first degree in political sci-University, where he graduated with a Master degree in politics. pleted his high school education at Huddersfield College before moving onence with distinction. Upon graduation, he secured a fellowship to ColumbiaThis introduction to a scholarship from the Rockefeller Foundation in New
ii                          The American Journal of Islamic Social Sciences 32:1
personal conversations over the years, one could argue here that Mazrui sawthink tanks, we must pay closer attention to what he said or did during hislifetime on Earth. Based on data available to me from his books, essays, andscholars, students, and administrators who are described elsewhere as membersof the "twelve tribes of Washington." More on these links to Mazruiana below;let us complete this profile in courage and scholarship of the man from Mom-bassa. After his graduation from Columbia University he went to Oxford Uni-versity, where he performed well and developed meaningful contacts withpersons associated with foundations and think tanks in the West.school that was not available to him as an undergraduate was destined later towelcome him as a graduate from Oxford and then - over time - elevated himto the rank of full professor after several years from his association with thatEast African center of higher learning. Again, in developing this profile of AliA. Mazrui and his involvement with centers of higher learning, think tanks,and Muslim organizations in the United States of America and beyond, let meadd three more points before we embark on a serious discussion of his entan-glements with Muslim pioneering think tanks such as the IIIT - on the onehand - and national, state, and local Islamic bodies across the country, on theother. Islam; the second deals with his ideas, aspirations, and activism between townand gown; and finally, his intimate involvement with the IIIT and its quest tomake a big difference in projecting a distinctive and respectable affirmationof Muslim values and cultures around the world. This triangular metaphor isdeployed ostensibly to highlight the man and his association with think tanks,scholars, and students around the globe.After receiving his doctorate, he secured a job at Makerere University. AThe first item on the agenda is Mazrui and his visions for Africa andThus, in writing about Professor Ali A. Mazrui and his involvement with
beings to bring about changes in our lives by harnessing our intellectual andthat foundations and think tanks are part and parcel of our decision as human
percent. Truth be told, the man from Mombasa was willing to link himselfprophetic in the classical sense of speaking to power in the face of social, eco-nomic, or political challenges. What is being said here is that, like other publicintellectuals, Mazrui was definitely willing to deploy words as swords ofmoral power in the battle of wills between those in the 1 percent and the 99material resources in the service of humanity and the natural order. For this and other related reasons, Mazrui's view of the world cast him as
over him. People from the Ford Foundation and other intellectual outposts inwith think tanks so long as their leaders were not going to impose their wills the West were familiar with the man and his ideas.
                                                                 Editorial                                                              iii
and the informed. Indeed, any social geographer who tries to document thethe IIIT, several points need to be identified for clarification and understand-ing. First of all, how did Ali engage the founders and staff of the IIIT? To thebest of my knowledge, Ali, who has been active in African and Islamic studies,was acquainted with the late Ismail Faruqi. Although I cannot identify pre-cisely the date and occasion when the two gentlemen knew each other, how-ever, I could assert categorically here that they started communicating andexchanging messages until the demise of the Palestinian-American colleague.Truth be told, Ali and Ismail met face-to-face in my presence at a conferenceorganized by the Unificationalist movement held in Miami in the same yearwhen former President Reagan defeated Jimmy Carter. Seyyed Hossein Nasr, then at Temple University before relocating to GeorgeWashington University. The purpose of that conference was to assemble someof the best intellectuals in the world who were willing to give the benefit ofthe doubt to the unificationist drive to facilitate a dialogue between peoplesfrom different religious and cultural traditions. In that gathering, scholars andactivists such as Ali A. Mazrui of Kenya, Francis Abdullah Botchway fromGhana, John Mbiti of Kenya, Khurshid Ahmed of Pakistan, and many youngerscholars like me conversed and interacted with others from other faith com-munities around the world. Ismail Faruqi was then the major Muslim partner,whose colleagues at Temple had already established the under the leadership of Dr. Leonard Swindler.and programs of think tanks, it would make sense to focus on how he engagedthe IIIT and what specific achievements can be identified for the perplexedIn writing about Professor Ali A. Mazrui and the think tanks, particularlyBoth of them enjoyed the company of their older colleagues such as Dr.Thus, in examining the role and place of Ali A. Mazrui in the operationsJournal of Pluralism
man and his work must look at the journals and books of IIIT and the signa-tures of Ali in those documents. Through his involvement with the chief. As a contributor, for example, he shared the literary space with youngerwas in vogue; it was at that moment when the late Samuel Huntington pushedscholars such as Muqtedar Khan who, at the time, was finishing his doctoratewith Dr. John Esposito at Georgetown University. At the time, globalizationSciences, Ali became first a contributor to the journal and later the editor-in-American Journal of Islamic Social
Social Scienceswritings of the think tanks. It is relevant here to point out to the reader thatAli's engagement with IIIT was a part of a greater desire to counter the chargestime published a volume on globalization in the his notion of the "clash of civilizations." Ali and the other contributors of the. Their exercise was a Muslim response to the orations andAmerican Journal of Islamic
iv                          The American Journal of Islamic Social Sciences 32:1
him Muhammad: "Truly, we are mirrors unto each other." This dictum was hishumble bearing and in his friendly relations with those who possess the Shake-spearean milk of human kindness. who listened to his father's lessons and performed well in Swahili as well asin English; he was a mirror of his cultural background and tried his best to bea mirror image as referenced in the widely circulated quote from the Prophetscholarship and his deliberate efforts to link town and gown in the UnitedStates and beyond. For example, at one of the annual event of the AMSS, Aliwas asked to deliver the annual lecture named after the late Ismail Faruqi.Like some of his predecessors within the AMSS, he is now off-stage; butAllah, who is the ultimate movie-maker for all times, had provided Mazruiwith intellect, humor, and bridge-building skills to widen the touch of IIIT inthe United States, Africa, and beyond. It was because of his links to the IIITthat Ali had serious moments with the board members and staff of the IIIT inNigeria, Micronesia, the Middle East, and in the United States. Again, becauseof his intimate relations with the IIIT, Ali and his second wife, Pauline Utiand counter-charges of scholars or journals seriously linked to the phenome-IIIT. I was present on many events where Ali presented and dialogued withcolleagues and guests who are not necessarily Muslim.non of Islamophobia. In retrospect Ali Mazrui, through his own testimoniesas well as the numerous Internet citations on Islamophobia and their arrowsnificant to say the following: He was the son of a chief angling on Ali's intellectual face, definitely came out of this trial and tribula-tion with the smiling face of Khalid ibn Walid.Association of Muslim Social Scientists (AMSS), Ali was honored for hisfrom Jos, Nigeria, shared many useful moments with the leadership of theBesides his involvement with the journal and the annual meetings of theIn summing up this brief memorial on Professor Ali A. Mazrui, it is sig-jannah and the best He reserved for the learned and cooperative amongAlhamdulillah, we call upon Allah to grantqāḍī from Mombasa
humanity. This Issue
fying predominant themes and ideas inherent in literary texts and looking atfocuses on some three important ways of teaching English literature in thelight of Islamic teachings. They are: inculcating Islamic/moral values; identi-We begin the first issue of 2015 with Md. Mahmudul Hasan's "English Lit-erary Studies: Including Islamic Perspectives in Pedagogy and Practice." He them from Islamic perspectives; and reforming the curriculum.
                                                                 Editorial                                                               v
"Islamic Perspective" by Ali Paya. He argues that the transdisciplinary ap-proach is not a methodology; it is rather a meta-method. Paya briefly discussesthe similarities and differences between science/knowledge and technology.He also critically examines the views of Basarab Nicolescu, one of the mostprolific proponents of a particular reading of the transdisciplinary approach.To shed more light on the potentials of the transdisciplinary approach, Payaends with some examples form the intellectual the Islamic culture.thors try to paint a brief but informative picture of Al-Turabi's life history.Spiritual Authority of the soning). In order to contextualize the reasoning behind his discourse, the au-and stimulating, but also sources of inspiration and motivation for their ownRepublic of Sudan and highlight the key concepts of his religious discourse:san A. Al-Turabi, the charismatic and pragmatic religio-political leader in theīmān to exploring the identity of the Imams, Masterton also traces the reabsorption into Shi'i culture of the Sufidefinition of cusses several key aspects of walāya as they appear recorded in Shi'i hadithcollections and later in one of the earliest Sunni Sufi treatises. In additionand al-Tabataba'i. IjtihādNext is "The Transdisciplinary Approach: A Critical Appraisal from anRebecca Masterton follows with her "A Comparative Exploration of theI hope that our readers will find these papers not only thought-provokingWe close with "Hassan al-Turabi's Religious Discourse on Faith, Renewal,(faith), " by Gubara Said Hassan and Jabal M. Buaben. They focus on Has-tajdīd walāya(renewal), and , using the works of groups related to al-Dhahabi andAwliyā' awliyā'ijtihādin the Shi'i and Sufi Traditions." She dis-and their role in relation to the Twelve(rational, independent, and legal rea-
research.
California State University, Fullerton, CAComparative Religion Departmentzibrahim@fullerton.edu Zakyi Ibrahim, Editor
