
STRATEGIC PRIORITIES 
The Centre operated in 2020 with the following strategic priorities:  
•     Increased throughput of postgraduate students 
•     Improved research quality and productivity 
•     Policy dialogue and networking 
•     Professional development  
•     Improved output in peer-reviewed publications 
•     Leadership in higher education scholarship 
•     Strengthened governance and financial sustainability 
 
 KEY HIGHLIGHTS 
Significant progress has been made by the Centre towards achieving its strategic priorities in 2020. With the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we quickly learned to operate in a technology-intensive environment for effective communication, conducting research, online teaching and social interaction. 
Increased throughput of postgraduate students  
The nine doctoral students attached to the Centre have made considerable progress in their studies in 2020 (see Table 1 below). Our own doctoral students have also made considerable progress, in spite of personal challenges. Their progress bears testimony to the hard work put in by students, their supervisors and the support provided by the Centre through its various training and scholarship development opportunities (discussed in detail later in the report). 
After dramatically battling with his health, Mr Khetsi Lehoko passed on in January, the same week he completed his PhD thesis for submission. It is now being examined for a posthumous degree. After several brain surgeries, Mr Bernard Akala has successfully completed his doctoral studies. Six of the Centre's doctoral students are in the process of drafting their theses, while two have submitted first full drafts, and one is under examination. The Centre's research training programme continues to provide quality support and professional engagement opportunities to postgraduate students, postdoctoral research fellows (PDRFs), research associates and staff. This has taken the form of online seminars and research project-related activities, including writing retreats. A new internship initiative for honours students, in partnership with UJ's Department of Sociology, has been established, wherein students gain valuable work-related experience at the Centre. 
Table 1: Postgraduate student progress 
Name of Student Supervisor Current Status Expected 
Completion date Bernard Akala Prof M Cross Completed Graduated Khetsi Lehoko Prof M Cross Thesis              being 
examined Sadly, passed on in January 2020 Naziema Jappie Prof M Cross Revising thesis December 2021 Kibashnie Naidoo Prof M Cross Thesis ready for submission June 2021 Name of Student Supervisor Current Status Expected 
Completion date David Matsepe Prof M Cross Completed Waiting for graduation Simon Nenji Dr A Ndofirepi Drafting thesis December 2021 Eckson Khambule Dr A Ndofirepi Drafting thesis  December 2021 Sindi Msimango Prof S Motala Completed  Waiting for graduation Mzamani Mdaka Prof M Modiba Drafting thesis December 2021 Elelwani Musetha (Master's) Prof J Divala Completed Graduated  
Improved research quality and productivity 
The provision of funding and the launch of the Book Series have resulted in several projects that have been completed or are under way at AMCHES. These include: 
Completed 
• The Changing Size and Shape of the Higher Education System in South Africa, 2005-2017. The report provides an overview of the changing size and shape of the higher education system and associated trends by race, gender, nationality and institution. It covers enrolments, both undergraduate and postgraduate, including by field of study and qualification level; participation, graduation and throughput rates; academic staff, including employment status and staff-to-student ratios; and research, both publication outputs and research master's and doctoral graduates. The report assesses the changes against the targets set in the 2001 National Plan for Higher Education, including the implications of the changes for finalising a framework that gives effect to the policy commitment for the development of a differentiated and diverse higher education system.  
Under way 
Student Epistemic Access, which responds to the massive escalation of students' enrolment from marginalised communities with the introduction of free higher education. The project, currently in the data analysis and write-up phase, focuses on undergraduate students in six institutions: Universities of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, Pretoria, Limpopo, Western Cape, and Central University of Technology. The unforeseen COVID-19 pandemic has presented challenges, specifically around university priorities and the transition to online activities, which have impacted project progress.  
•     Generations of African Scholars and Universities (Flagship Project 2020-2025): A continent-wide project with the primary objective of documenting the African intellectual legacy, particularly the contribution of African scholars, intellectuals, leaders and institutions to higher education discourse and development. An advert has been issued for two postdoctoral fellowships to work on this project. 
•     Creating the New African University: A concept paper has been developed and a call for contributions will be circulated soon.  
•     ICT Higher Education Integration in Times of Social Transition − Case Study of Sweden and South Africa: An attempt to distil key theoretical, strategic and policy 



 
 
newly appointed SARCHi Chair for Teaching and Learning at UJ, Prof Shireen Motala, including research and publishing collaboration. AMCHES is also undertaking joint projects with the CHE on Funding, Labour Market and Epistemic Access. 
Professional development  
Professional development has taken off at the Centre. A Master's programme in Higher Education Studies has been submitted to the Faculty for approval, and similar plans are in place for a doctoral programme. This innovative programme is designed to prepare the next generation of scholars, researchers, policy advocates, and leaders in the field of higher education in Africa and beyond. In addition, two senior staff, Prof Michael Cross and Dr Logan Govender, delivered the Curriculum and Educational Change module, part of UJ's Master's programme in Education Curriculum Studies in the second quarter of 2020. This proved to be a baptism fire into the realm of digital teaching in the wake of COVID-19.  
Improved output in peer-reviewed publications 
Overall research output continues to grow with the following DHET-accredited publications recorded in 2020: 6 books, 23 book chapters, and 15 articles published. In addition, 5 books are in press, and 2 under review. The Centre uploaded for subsidy purposes 32 units: 4 (DVPs); 9 (Research Associates); 10 (PDRFs); 9 (Centre staff and their students), with 5 excluded due to incomplete documentation. The book series projects (with Brill and SunMedia) have elevated the profile of the Centre in providing leadership in scholarship development across the globe. (See Table 2: Publications, Table 3: Postdoctoral research fellows' output and Table 4: PhD students' output).  
Table 2: Publications     Type           of 
publication  Year Published DHET 
accredited n/DHET accredited Under review Envisaged in 2021   Books 2015 0 0 0 0   2016 1 1 0 0   2017 6 6 0 0   2018 1 1 0 1   2019 1 1 0 4   2020 6 6     2021     7  Book chapters 2015 1 1 0 0   2016 4 4 0 0   2017 15 15 0 0   2018 8 8 0 0   2019 6 6 0 7 17  2020 23 23     2021     22  Journal articles  2015 2 2 0 0   2016 12 12 0 0   2017 11 11 0 0    2018 6 6 0 0    2019 8 8 0 5    2020 15 15 0 0    2021     11  6 
  
important titles and two more to be published in 2021 (see our publications list). With considerable local and international impact are our book series with Brill Sense publishers - African Higher Education: Developments and Perspectives, and Sun Press - Higher Education Transformation, which continue to grow. To the three volumes − Knowledge and Change Vols. I and II and Regionalization of African Higher Education Vol. III, we have added three new titles: Emnet T. Woldegiorgis & Christine 
Sherer (eds.). (2019) Trends in Higher Education Partnerships between African and 
European Universities. Brill/Sense; and Ihron Rensburg, Shireen Motala and Michael 
Cross (eds.). Higher Education Transformation: Pathways to Higher Education Reform. AHE Book Series. Brill/Sense; and Amasa Ndofirepi and Martin Musengi (eds.) Inclusion as Social Justice: Theory and Practice in African Higher Education. AHE Book Series. Publisher: Brill/Sense. Sun Press has also released the following volume: Andre Keet and Michael Cross (eds.). Scholarly Engagement and Decolonisation: Views from South Africa, The Netherlands and the United States.  
Strengthened governance and financial sustainability  
The Centre has experienced good progress in its governance and financial sustainability endeavours. The appointment of two staff members, Prof Emnet Woldegiorgis and Dr Logan Govender, has strengthened the research capacity of AMCHES, and with the Centre now being included in the normal University budget, it has a solid financial foundation. The Centre has also attracted external funding of over R1.6 million to support its research programme. After completion of his five years as Distinguished Visiting Professor, Bruce Macfarlane has donated the honoraria and all funds generated from his research and publications to the Centre to support its research programme and the development of young scholars. The Centre has furthermore benefitted from the support and advice received from the Executive Dean of the Faculty and the University Senior Management. Finally, AMCHES remains committed to the professional development programme agreed upon with Universities South Africa (USAf). 
Overall, our experience under COVID-19 has left us with important lessons: the need for a reconstituted environment that supersedes the limitations of physical space and distance to enable the full realisation of our tasks; the exploration and adoption of more suitable pedagogies and methodologies; the centrality of social justice in the form and content of our practices; and psychological and emotional preparedness to operate effectively under current circumstances, including greater degrees of discipline and self-regulation. 
A more detailed account of the progress and challenges in addressing the Centre's strategic priorities in the year under review is provided below. 
Publications Books 
African Higher Education Series (Editors - M. Cross, A. Keet and E. Woldegiorgis; 
Editorial Assistant - L. Govender) 
Published 
Rensburg, I. Motala, S. and Cross, M. (eds.). (2020). Transforming Universities in South Africa: Pathways to Higher Education Reform. Leiden/Boston: BRILL Sense Publishers. 
Ndofirepi, Amasa P. (2020). Inclusion and Social Justice: Theory and Practice in African Higher Education. Leiden/Boston: Brill Sense Publishers. 
Muna, N. and Assié-Lumumba N'Dri, T. (eds). (2020). Education and Development Outcomes for Equality and Governance in Africa. New York: Palgrave. 
Muna, N. and Assié-Lumumba N'Dri, T. (eds). (2020). Education and the Development of Human Capital: Outcomes for Equity and Governance in Africa. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Forthcoming 
Gwaravanda, Ephraim, T. & Ndofirepi, Amasa P. (eds.). African Higher education in the 21st Century: Epistemological, Ontological and Ethical Perspectives. Leiden/Boston: Brill Sense, September 2020. 
Seale, O. Deanship in the South: Bridging Troubled Waters. Leiden/Boston: Brill Sense. 
Cross, M., Long M.C., Ndlovu S. & Nyoni P. Transformative Curricular, Pedagogies and Epistemologies: Teaching and Learning in Diverse Higher Education Contexts. Leiden/Boston: Brill Sense. 
African Higher Education Transformation Series (Editors - Andre Keet and M. Cross; 
Editorial Assistant - J.B. du Preez) 
Published 
Maurice Crul, Liezl Dick, Halleh Ghorashi & Abel Valenzuela. (2020). Scholarly Engagement and Decolonisation: Views from South Africa, The Netherlands and the United States. Stellenbosch: African Sun Media. 
Rensburg, I. Serving higher purposes - University mergers in post-apartheid South Africa. Stellenbosch: African Sun Media. 
Other books (forthcoming) 
M. Cross, L. Govender & A. Essop (eds.). The South African Democratic Teachers' Union (SADTU) and the Struggle for Professional Unionism. UKZN Press. 
N'Dri T. Assié-Lumumba, Kanishka Bedi, Michael Cross & Yatigammana Ekanayake (eds.). Ubuntu and Comparative Education and International Education for Peace. WCCES Series. Leiden/Boston: Brill. 
N'Dri T. Assié-Lumumba (Ed). African Renaissance onwards the 21st Century: Endogeneity, Historical Contingencies, and Purposeful Fusion by Education. Africa World Press & Red Sea Press. 
Soudien, C., Kallaway, P., Cross P. & Fischer, C. (2021). 'Incindi ye Khala' - A Bitter Harvest: 350 Years of Formal Schooling in South Africa. Under review. 
 
 
Woldegiorgis, E.T., Turner, I. & Brahima, A. (Eds.). (2020). Decolonisation of Higher Education in Africa: Perspectives from Hybrid Knowledge Production. Routledge. 
Book Chapters 
Published 
Adem, S. (2020). Reason and Number: African Reflections on Japan. In R Anthony and Ruppert U (eds.). Reconfiguring Transregionalisation in the Global South: African Asian Encounters. Palgrave Macmillan.  
Assie-Lumumba, N'Dri T. (2020). The African University Tradition: A Historical 
Perspective in Manja Klemenčič (ed.) Mass and Elite Higher Education Systems in 21st Century section of the Encyclopedia of International Higher Education Systems and Institutions, Springer, 2018. (https://meteor.springer.com/login.jsf), Netherlands: Springer, 2020. 
Assie-Lumumba N'Dri T. (2020). Series Introduction. In Zehavit Gross (ed.). Migrants and Comparative Education, Leiden and Boston: Brill Sense, 2020, pp. ix-xiii.  
Assie-Lumumba N'Dri T. (2020). Freire and Africa: A focus and impact in Education, with Yusef Waghid and José Cossa, in Torres, C.A. (ed.). The Wiley Handbook on Paulo Freire, Oxford: Wiley Publisher, 2019, pp. 149-166  
Cross, M. & Cross, M. Jr. (2020). Migration, Xeno/Afrophobia and Human Rights in South Africa. In Z Gross (ed.), Migrants and Comparative Education: Call to Re/Engagement. Brill Sense Publishers. 
Cross, M. & Motala, S. (2020). Introduction. In Rensburg, I., Motala, S & Cross, M (eds.). Transforming Universities in South Africa: Pathways to Higher Education. Brill Sense Publishers. 
Rensburg, I. (2020). Transformation of Higher Education in South Africa, 1995-2016: Current Limitations and Future Possibilities. In Rensburg, I., Motala, S. and Cross, M. (eds.). Transforming Universities in South Africa: Pathways to Higher Education. BRILL Sense Publishers. 
Rensburg, I. (2020). Global Africa: Nelson Mandela and the Meaning of Decolonising Knowledge and Universities, In Rensburg, I., Motala, S. and Cross, M. (eds.). Transforming Universities in South Africa: Pathways to Higher Education. Brill Sense Publishers. 
Rensburg, I. (2020). South Africa's Opportunity: Crafting a Differentiated Higher Education System. In Rensburg, I., Motala, S. and Cross, M. (eds.). Transforming Universities in South Africa: Pathways to Higher Education. Brill Sense Publishers. 
Motala, S. (2020). General Trends and impact of the Internationalisation of Higher Education in South Africa. In Rensburg, I., Motala, S. & Cross, M. (eds.). Transforming Universities in South Africa: Pathways to Higher Education. Brill Sense Publishers. 
Motala, S. & Rensburg I. (2020). Conclusion. In Rensburg, I., Motala, S. and Cross, M. (eds.). Transforming Universities in South Africa: Pathways to Higher Education. Brill Sense Publishers. 
Cross, M. (2020). Decolonising Universities in South Africa: Backtracking and Revisiting the Debate. In Rensburg, I., Motala, S. and Cross, M. (eds.). Transforming Universities in South Africa: Pathways to Higher Education. Brill Sense Publishers. 
Ndofirepi, Amasa P. and Musengi, M. (2020). Deciphering the Conversations. In A.P. Ndofirepi and M. Musengi (eds.). Inclusion as Social Justice: Theory and Practice in African Higher Education. Brill Publishers. 
Ndofirepi, Amasa P., Mathebula T. and Gwaravanda, Ephraim T. (2020). On Relevance: A Critique of Knowledge Processes in African University. In A.P. Ndofirepi and M. Musengi (eds.). Inclusion as Social Justice: Theory and Practice in African Higher Education. Brill Sense Publishers. 
Ndofirepi, Amasa P. and Gwaravanda, Ephraim T. (2020). Inclusion and Social Justice: Creating Space for Africa Epistemologies in the African University. In A.P. 
Ndofirepi and M. Musengi (eds.). Inclusion as Social Justice: Theory and Practice in African Higher Education. Brill Sense Publishers. 
Ndofirepi, Amasa P. and Ndofirepi, Elizabeth S. (2020). Epistemic Insolence in the African University: An Anti-Colonial Quest for Liberated Intellectual Spaces. In A.P. Ndofirepi and M. Musengi (eds.). Inclusion as Social Justice: Theory and Practice in African Higher Education. Brill Sense Publishers. 
Ndofirepi, Amasa P. and Musengi, M. (2020). Lessons, Challenges and Opportunities for Inclusive Higher Education. In A.P. Ndofirepi and M. Musengi (eds). Inclusion as Social Justice: Theory and Practice in African Higher Education. BRILL Sense Publishers. 
Ndlovu, S. (2020). Obstacles for students with disabilities in accessing higher education in South Africa. In A. Ndofirepi and M. Musengi (eds.). Inclusion as Social Justice: Theory and Practice in African Higher Education. Brill Sense Publishers. 
Ndlovu, S. (2020). Challenges confronting students with disabilities in research engagement in South Africa. In Z. Atibuni (ed.). Postgraduate Research Engagement in Low Resource Settings: Emerging Research and Opportunities (pp. 129-149). IGI Hershey, PA: Global Publishers. doi:10.4018/978-1-7998-0264-8. 
Ndlovu, S. (2020). Obstacles for students with disabilities in the supervision process at postgraduate levels in South Africa. In Z. Atibuni (Ed.), Postgraduate Research Engagement in Low Resource Settings: Emerging Research and Opportunities (pp. 246-263) IGI Hershey, PA: Global Publishers. doi:10.4018/978-1-7998 -0264-8. 
Nyoni, P. (2020). Pedagogy and Agency in Postgraduate Student Supervision in a Rural South African University. In Dennis Zami Atibuni (ed.). Postgraduate Research Engagement in Low Resource Settings, IGI Global, pp. 296-316. 
Forthcoming 
Cross, M. Transition, reform or transformation? Mapping out the discursive space of African Renaissance in African higher education. In N.T. Assie-Lumumba (ed.). 
African Renaissance onwards the 21st Century: Endogeneity, Historical Contingencies, and Purposeful Fusion by Education. Africa World Press & Red Sea Press. 
Ndofirepi, E. & Cross, M. (2020). Beyond Classroom Pedagogies: Embracing studentdriven activities in students' social and intellectual development in South African higher education. In N.T. Assie-Lumumba, B. Kanisha, M. Cross & E. Yatigammana (eds.). Ubuntu, Comparative Education and International Education for Peace. Brill Sense Publishers. 
Ndlovu, S. Humanity and ableism: Construction and deconstruction of disability. In M. Steyn & W. Mpofu (eds.). Doing human. Wits Press. 
Ndlovu, S. Challenges of Universal Design in South African higher education. In Gwaravanda, E. & Amasa P. & Ndofirepi, A.P. (eds.). African Higher Education in the 21st Century. Brill Sense Publishers. 
Ndlovu, S. 'Patched onto the system' Students with disabilities' inclusion in teaching and learning in South Africa. In Cross, M., Long, C., Ndlovu, S. & Nyoni, P. (eds.). Transformative curricula, pedagogies and epistemologies: Teaching and learning in diverse higher education contexts. Brill Sense Publishers. 
Ndlovu, S. Throughput in higher learning: The case of students with disabilities in South African higher learning. In D. Chiwandikire (ed.). Making the Disability Circle Bigger. Unisa Press. 
Ndlovu, S. Inclusion of students with disabilities in the United Kingdom: Lessons for 
South Africa. In N'Dri T. Assié-Lumumba, Kanishka Bedi, Michael Cross and 
Yatigammana Ekanayake, Ubuntu and Comparative Education and International Education for Peace. Brill Sense Publishers. 
Nyoni, P. Myths Surrounding the Extended Curriculum in South Africa's Higher Education Sector. In Michael Cross, Margaret Caroline Long, Sibonokuhle Ndlovu & Phefumula Nyoni (eds.). Transformative Curricula, Pedagogies and Epistemologies: Teaching and Learning in Diverse Higher Education Contexts. 
Nyoni, P. University lecturers as agents of change and social justice within a rural 
South African context. In Alfred Masinire & Amasa P. Ndofirepi (eds.). Rurality and Social Justice in the 21st Century African Higher Education: some theoretical and practical debates. 
Nyoni, P.N. Ubuntu Philosophy and the Gender Crisis within South Africa's Higher 
Education Sector. In N'Dri T. Assié-Lumumba, Kanishka Bedi, Michael Cross and Yatigammana Ekanayake, Ubuntu and Comparative Education and International Education for Peace. BRILL Sense Publishers. 
Woldegiorgis, E.T. The Emergence of Decolonisation Debates in African Higher Education: A Historical Perspective. In A. Brahima, I. Turner & E. T. Woldegiorgis. Decolonisation of Higher Education in Africa: Perspectives from Hybrid Knowledge Production (pp. XXX - XXX). Abingdon: Routledge. 
Woldegiorgis, E.T. (2021). Re-Thinking Inclusive Higher Education for Students with
Disabilities: A Proactive Approach Towards Epistemic Access in Ethiopia. In Social, Educational, and Cultural Perspectives of Disabilities in the Global South (p. 235-250). IGI Global. 
Woldegiorgis, E. Decolonizing the African Union Regional Higher Education Policy: A 
Tentative Approach against Neo-colonial Entanglement. In A.P. Ndofirepi, S. Vurayai & G. Erima. Unyoking African University Knowledges: Voices from the Subaltern (pp. 
XXX - XXX) 
Journal articles 
Published 
Nyoni, P. (2020). The paradox of internationalising higher education through Ubuntu philosophy, Indilinga-Journal of Indigenous Knowledge Systems, 19(1): 110-125 
Nyoka, B. 2020. Mafeje on Black Struggles in South Africa: History and Theory, Social Dynamics, 46(1): 50-66. 
Assie-Lumumba, N'Dri T. (2020). An Audacious and Imperative Global Social Contract for the Collective Good, an essay review of the Comparative and International Education Society's George F. Kneller Keynote Lecture, A Call for Action to Achieve Sustainable Development Goal 4, by Jeffrey Sachs, Comparative Education Review, 64(1), February 2020: 153-155.  
Macfarlane, B. and Eriksen, M. (2020). The right to teach in higher education: A Humboldtian perspective, Educational Theory and Practice in Education, DOI: 10.1080/00131857.2020.1783245. 
Macfarlane, B. (2020). Myths about students in higher education: separating fact from folklore, Oxford Review of Education, DOI: 10.1080/03054985.2020.1724086 
Forthcoming 
Woelert, P. (2020). Key selection criteria as administrative devices: An investigation of academic bureaucratization at Australian universities. Science and Public Policy. 
Woelert, P., Lewis, J.M. & Le, A.T.P. (2020). Formally alive yet practically complex: An exploration of academics' perceptions of their autonomy as researchers. Higher Education Policy.  
Woldegiorgis, E. T. (2020). Decolonising a higher education system which has never been colonised'. Educational Philosophy and Theory, 1-13. 
Woldegiorgis, E.T. & Cross, M. [Review of the book Re-visioning Education in Africa: Ubuntu-Inspired Education for Humanity, by Takyi-Amoako, E.J. & Assié-Lumumba, N.T. (eds.). Global Comparative Education: Journal of the World Council of Comparative Education Societies (WCCES). 
Technical Reports 
Published 

 
 
Essop, A. (2020) The Changing Size and Shape of the Higher Education System in South Africa, 2005-2017. Ali Mazrui Centre for Higher Education Studies, University of Johannesburg. 
Cross, M. and Kulati, T. (2020) The Policy and Regulative Context of Higher Education in SA. Ali Mazrui Centre for Higher Education Studies, University of Johannesburg. 
Woldegiorgis, E.T. (2020). Mapping Higher Education Public Policy in Africa (MHEPPA).  
RESEARCH TRAINING/SCHOLARSHIP DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVES  
Seminar Series 
In 2020, AMCHES organised several online seminars. 
Writing retreats  
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, no writing retreats were organised.  
Writing for publication workshops and working groups 
Writing for publication workshops are targeted at doctoral and postdoctoral students of the Faculty of Education to enable them to produce good quality scholarly work, particularly journal articles publishable in the journals accredited by the Department of Higher Education and Training. We already have evidence of success in this regard. 
In 2020, workshops were suspended due to staffing challenges and the COVID-19 pandemic.  
Tuesday meetings and Thursday seminars  
The Tuesday work-in-progress meetings are aimed at affording the Centre's doctoral students and PDRFs in particular an opportunity to meet, discuss their research and share challenges and strategies under supervision of senior scholars. The Thursday seminars provide all members of the Centre, especially PDRFs and doctoral students, a platform to present their finished research output and receive advice and feedback.  
The table below provides details of the several scholarship development and training activities for 2020.  
Table 4: Postgraduate, postdoctoral and staff internal seminars and presentations  Date of event Venue Topic Presenter   30 July 2020 Virtual seminar Literature review of a study on epistemic access and success in higher education Dr Sibonokuhle Ndlovu   18        August 
2020 Virtual seminar Size and Shape of Higher 
Education in South Africa (2005-2017) Mr Ahmed Essop    03         March 
2020 Tuesday seminar Beyond the Basics: An 
Evaluation of the 
University of Zimbabwe's Ms Tendayi Dzinoreva  14 
  
Centre's programmes beyond the University, while collaboration with the Centre for Critical Studies at the Nelson Mandela University (NMU) continued in 2020.  
Internationally, our links with major African research networks, such as CODESRIA and OSREA, and membership of international associations, including African Network for Internationalisation of Education (ANIE), Comparative and International Education Society (CIES), and the World Congress of Comparative Education Societies 
(WCCES), continued to grow. Facilitating this process is our representation in the WCCES Research Committee and the Education and Peace Committee, as well as in the CIES Higher Education and BANTABA interest groups. BANTABA is an Africa interest group and network of scholars within the CIES. The Centre also joined the Epistemologies of the South Forum (under the Latin American Social Sciences Council − CLACSO), which brings together scholars interested in exploring alternative and context sensitive epistemologies and pedagogies. The book series projects have elevated the profile of the Centre in providing leadership in scholarship development across the continent. 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
The Centre has launched a new initiative for a master's and doctoral programme in Higher Education Studies that will expand the horizon of theoretical, empirical, and policy reflections in the field. Significant progress was made with the preparation of a proposal and short learning programmes (SLPs) for the master's degree component. It will be both policy and research-based master's and doctoral training that will allow graduates to forge careers in and outside of academia. This innovative programme is designed to prepare the next generation of scholars, researchers, policy advocates, and leaders in the field of higher education in Africa and beyond. The proposed programme will combine and accommodate blended approaches, integrating both online delivery components and on-campus engagements to meet the needs of learners and the goals of the course. 
AMCHES has established an internship initiative, led by Dr Zahraa McDonald (PDRF). In 2020, six Sociology Honours students from UJ's Department of Sociology were accommodated for their internship programme. AMCHES provides valuable workrelated experience to the students. It was clear from their inputs that they hoped to acquire useful experience in a research environment so that they could consider research as a possible career option. 
Prof Cross and Dr Govender delivered the online MEd course Curriculum and 
Educational Change module, part of UJ's Master's programme in Education Curriculum Studies. This was under Phase 4 lockdown of the COVID-19 pandemic in the second quarter of 2020.  
Despite the delay in the implementation, AMCHES remains committed to the professional development programme agreed upon with Universities South Africa (USAf). The programme involves a multiplicity of service providers across the country with the support of DHET.  
STRENGTHENED GOVERNANCE AND FINANCIAL SUSTAINABILITY 
The appointment of two staff members, Prof Emnet Woldegiorgis and Dr Logan 
Govender, has strengthened the research capacity of AMCHES. The Centre has now been placed under the normal university budget, which provides it with a solid financial foundation. AMCHES has attracted external funding of over R1.6 million to support its research programme, and has committed itself to a comprehensive fundraising strategy for its 2021 plan. It is now well positioned for the appointment of a suitable Advisory Board. The Centre has also benefitted from the support and advice received from the Executive Dean of the Faculty and the University Senior Management. 
