credentials in higher education, and the investigation of generations of African scholars and universities have all contributed to our mission of advancing knowledge and transforming African higher education. We have also delved into critical areas such as the decolonization of higher education systems and epistemologies in Africa, the role of teachers and teachers' unions, university society engagement in Africa, and the universities' history project.
The AMCHES has undergone remarkable growth, now comprising four full-time academic staff (three associate professors and a senior lecturer, with  a vacant lecturer position to be filled), one distinguished visiting professor, seventeen (17) research associates, ten (10) postdoctoral research fellows and one administrative assistant. Looking ahead, the centre has set its sights on ambitious expansion by welcoming ten additional PhD students and four postdoctoral researchers to its team. Furthermore, the centre is excited to embark on innovative research projects centred on early career academics and the integration of technology in higher education. These initiatives promise to bring valuable insights and advancements to the field.

In our commitment to fostering intellectual dialogue, AMCHES hosted several public lectures and book launches, inviting renowned scholars who have made significant contributions to higher education research. These events served as invaluable platforms for exchanging ideas, engaging in thought-provoking discussions, and strengthening our network within the academic community. I applaud our centre for promoting intellectual exchange and collaboration, which are crucial in driving progress and innovation.
None of these achievements would have been possible without your hard work, dedication, and unwavering commitment to excellence. I am immensely proud of the tireless efforts each member of the AMCHES team has contributed, and I extend my heartfelt appreciation to all of you. Together, we have demonstrated the power of collective effort in advancing knowledge and transforming higher education in Africa.
As we celebrate our accomplishments, I also encourage all of you to embrace new adventures and horizons in research, teaching, and publications in the years to come. The journey ahead holds immense potential for further growth and impact, and I have every confidence that the AMCHES community will continue to lead the way.
Once again, congratulations to members of the Centre on a successful year and thank you for your invaluable contributions. Let us embark on the future with renewed enthusiasm and a steadfast commitment to pushing the boundaries of knowledge and shaping the future of higher education in Africa.
Professor Emnet T. Woldegiorgis

Table of Contents
Introduction to AMCHES                                                                                                                                                             3
From humble beginnings to African knowledge hub                                                                                                        3
Research Projects Hosted between 2022-2023                                                                                                                  3
Research Collaboration and Partnerships                                                                                                                             4
Book Projects and Special Issues Hosted by the Centre                                                                                                  5
Public Lectures and Book Launches                                                                                                                                        7
PhD Seminars                                                                                                                                                                                  10
Writing Retreats                                                                                                                                                                             11
International Travels, Keynotes, and Paper Presentations by Staff Members and PDRFs                                    13
Short Learning Programmes (SLPs)                                                                                                                                         15
PhDs and Postgraduate students and their research areas                                                                                            15 
Introducing New Staff Members and PDRFs                                                                                                                        16
Postdoctoral Research Fellows                                                                                                                                                 17
PhD Graduates                                                                                                                                                                                18
Opinion Piece                                                                                                                                                                                  19
List of Publications                                                                                                                                                                        21

Editorial Team
Professor Emnet Woldegiorgis, Director, AMCHES
Dr Logan Govender, Senior Lecturer, AMCHES
Ms Loria Mokoena, Administrative Assistant, AMCHES
Introduction to AMCHES 
From humble beginnings to African knowledge hub
AMCHES was established in February 2016, with the formal launch of the Centre occurring on 3 August 2017. Its establishment was the culmination of the vision and lifelong ambition of AMCHES' founding director, Professor Michael Cross. AMCHES's vision is to contribute to enhancing the role of higher education towards social and economic development in Africa within the context of democratisation and social justice. It's mission, to be a Pan-African centre for scholarly research inquiry, training and professional development in higher education, is expressed through several programmes, including research projects, research training and professional development, emerging researchers' development programme and advocacy and dialogue. A key objective of AMCHES is to produce knowledge that contributes to a deeper and nuanced understanding of strategic issues in higher education through multidisciplinary and policy-relevant research. The Centre is constituted under the Faculty of Education and is directed by Professor Emnet Woldegiorgis. 

Research Projects Hosted between 2022- 2023 
AMCHES is currently hosting several research projects. A brief description follows.
Consultancies undertaken by AMCHES research associate, Mr Ahmed Essop
•    Leadership and management challenges in the School of Oral Health Sciences and the School of Health Care Sciences at Sefako Makgatho Health Sciences University.
•    Report on the Accreditation of Existing and New Programmes in the Context of Changing Approaches to Teaching and Learning Post-COVID 19; prepared for the Council on Higher Education Task Team on Online and Blended Learning.
•    Micro-Credentials in Higher Education, prepared for the Academic Development and Support Division, University of Johannesburg.
•    Modelling the funding requirements for the development of a business plan for the introduction of a Medical Programme in the Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Johannesburg.
Steering Student Epistemic Access and Success in Higher Education Phase 1 (CHE-funded)
The project responds to the massive escalation of students' enrolment from marginalized communities with the introduction of free higher education. Led by Drs Logan Govender and Zahraa McDonald, and Mr Ahmed Essop, the project focused on undergraduate students in six institutions: Universities of the Witwatersrand, 
Johannesburg, Pretoria, Limpopo, Western Cape, and Central University of Technology. It was concluded in 
June 2022 and the report submitted to CHE. Following feedback from the CHE a Ministerial Policy Advisory Note on student epistemic access was completed in March 2023. A condensed version of the report is to be published as part of the CHE's Higher Education Monitor Series in due course.
Steering Student Epistemic Access and Success in Higher Education Phase 2 (NRF-funded)
The Centre has been successful in securing funding of R1.5 million from the NRF to extend its Student 
Epistemic Access Project to another four universities, under the title Steering Epistemic Access and Success of Historically Disadvantaged Students in South African Universities. The participating universities are University of KwaZulu-Natal, University of Cape Town, Nelson Mandela University and University of Fort Hare. The project is currently led by Dr Logan Govender, who took over from the original project leader, Professor Michael Cross, and is scheduled for completion at the end of 2024. Dr Baleni Sibanda, AMCHES post-doctoral research fellow is contracted to the project as National Project Coordinator.
Higher education under COVID-19 and beyond
A report on the impact of COVID-19 on higher education, which was commissioned by the NRF/SARChI Chair for Teaching and Learning at UJ, has been completed.
Generations of African Scholars and Universities (Flagship Project - 2020-2025)
Led by Prof Emnet Woldegiorgis, this is a continent-wide project with the primary objective of documenting the legacy of African scholars and their intellectual contributions. A book project has been commissioned, led by Professor Constantin Katsakioris, from the American University of Baghdad, titled The legacies of African Scholars in the Soviet Bloc. Two PDRFs, Babalola Balogun and Emmanuel Intsiful are also working on the project under the supervision of Prof Emnet Woldegiorgis. Dr Balogun's book project is on Segun Gbadegesin's Concept of African Personhood and His Tripartite Intellectual Evolution. It aims at interrogating and documenting the contributions of the Nigeria-born scholar and philosopher, Segun Gbadegesin, to the overall African tradition of scholarship and, particularly African personhood discourse. The project is motivated by two central considerations. One is the critical role played by the African concept of personhood in theoretical analyses of African problems; and the other is Gbadegesin's unique insights into the concept and its intelligent deployment as an analytical device in the engagements of issues in ethics, social and political philosophy, and bioethics. Dr Intsiful's project focuses on mapping and exploring the biographies and identities of distinguished African leaders and intellectuals who have contributed to shaping and reshaping African ideologies and philosophies in higher education in West Africa over the past five decades. The project will also examine how these scholars' philosophies, ideologies, and contributions have endured in the face of global dynamics. 
Universities History Project - Case Study of University of Johannesburg
Led by Dr Logan Govender and Prof. Shireen Motala, the project is part of a national project coordinated by Prof. Salim Badat at the University of the Free State. It focuses on the development of South African universities during pre-apartheid, apartheid and post-apartheid eras, and challenges of higher education transformation, such as higher education financing and governance, and how these challenges have been confronted. Dr Tshepo Mvulane-Moloi, a PDRF at AMCHES, and former student at UJ, is undertaking the research. Following extensive fieldwork during 2023, including sourcing of archival material and interviews, the project is at the data analysis phase. One of the main project outputs is a book publication on the History of University of Johannesburg, which is scheduled for completion in 2024.
University-Society Engagement in Africa
Led by Prof Woldegiorgis, Prof Teklu Abate Bekele and Dr Denis Thaddeus Ofoyuru, the project is a collaboration with the American University in Cairo and Makerere University in Uganda. Those leading the project have completed the manuscript and submitted it for publication. 
Early Career Academics in South African Higher Education
Too late yet still quite early? Investigating the experiences of "older" early career academics in South African higher education is a project funded by the National Institute for the Humanities and Social Sciences, led by AMCHES Associate Professor Mlamuli Hlatshwayo. The project explores and theorises the often forgotten and overlooked experiences of "older" early career academics (often in their late 30s/early to late 40s, and some even in the 50s), highlighting the rich and complex narratives and experiences of career academics, and the various ways in which they negotiate their being, belonging and becoming in the South African higher education system.
Black Women Academics' Experiences in a South African University
Prof Hlatshwayo has also been researching the complex experiences of Black women academics in a researchintensive university in South Africa. The findings, to be published in the Journal of Education, revealed firstly, that many of the research participants are "accidental academics" in higher education due to the nature of their entry and access to the university. Secondly, the findings also showed the important role that formal and informal mentoring plays in higher education, as a catalyst in helping Black women academics access, negotiate and potentially succeed at university. The paper concludes with a recommendation for formalised and wellstructured mentoring systems in higher education that will support Black women academics' access, being and belonging in the university.

Research Collaboration and Partnerships
The following are some of the highlights of the partnership projects in 2022 and 2023. 
Decolonisation and Indigenous Knowledge Systems in Africa, University of Bayreuth, Germany: Professor Emnet Woldegiorgis and Professor Irina Turner collaborated on a research project on the theme, Decolonization and Indigenous Knowledge Systems in Africa. The project has two phases: Phase 1 - Decolonization and Hybrid knowledge systems, which was between 2020-2022. The project involved more than fifteen scholars from three different continents. The project concluded with a book published by Routledge Press, Decolonisation of Higher Education in Africa: Perspectives from Hybrid Knowledge Production. Phase 2 - On the theme, Narrowing the Gap beyond Tokenism: The Transdisciplinary Search for Innovative Approaches in Decolonization, was launched in 2022 with funding from the Volkswagen Stiftung (Volkswagen Foundation) (25,000 Euros). The project led to hosting an international conference in February 2022, which led to a publication of the second volume in the form of a special issue with the journal Curriculum Perspectives. The publication is expected to be out late 2023.
African Higher Education in the Face of a Global Pandemic, University of the Free State and North-West University: The project was led by Professor Emnet Woldegiorgis and Professor Petronella Jonck. It was a book project involving mainly South African scholars. Dr Logan Govender and Dr Phefumula Nyoni also contributed chapters for the book. The book was published in March 2022.
University Society Engagement in Africa, American University in Cairo and Ekulu University in Uganda: Professor Emnet Woldegiorgis, Professor Teklu Abate Bekele (Cairo) and Dr Denis Thaddeus Ofoyuru (Ekulu) have launched a research project on "University Society Engagement in Africa" in 2022. The project is initiated in collaboration with the American University in Cairo and Ekulu University in Uganda. The first part of the project has been completed and a manuscript has been submitted for publication.
AMCHES and NRF/SARChI Chair: The SARChI Chair in Teaching and Learning, led by Professor Shireen Motala, and AMCHES have established a partnership to undertake joint research and research related activities. This consolidates a long working relationship between AMCHES researchers and the SARChI Chair. This is based on common theoretical starting points of equity, social justice and epistemic access. In pursuance of this, some key activities have been undertaken and others are planned. These include participation in the AMCHES multiyear research projects on Epistemic Access commissioned by the CHE and NRF, and the History of Universities project, co-hosting distinguishing visiting professors, contributing to thought leadership through hosting two joint seminars in July and August 2022 on the Future of Higher Education during COVID- 19, and 4IR and teaching and learning developments in education, as well as joint supervision of postgraduate students and postdoctoral research fellows. A book project that targeted prominent authors who are academics and university leaders, 'Creating a New African University' was published in the Brill series in 2023. Capacity building and the development of the next generation of scholars are high on the agenda of  both entities and further joint initiatives are planned. Future research projects include the 'Future-focused University post COVID-19 and the pandemic'.
Policy dialogue and networking: Our efforts towards consolidating institutional, national and international networks and policy dialogues have grown substantially. At the institutional and national levels, more researchers across the Faculty are participating in the Centre's projects and in our scholarship development programmes. AMCHES is committed to dedicating considerable attention to advance participatory endeavours. 
Our collaboration with the SARChI Chair for Teaching and Learning at UJ, Professor Shireen Motala, and Professor Andre Keet of the Centre for Critical Studies at the Nelson Mandela University (NMU), including research and publishing, grew significantly in 2022 and 2023. AMCHES is also undertaking joint projects with the CHE on Funding, Labour Market and Epistemic Access, as well as with Professor Saleem Badat of the University of the Free State on the universities' history and transformation project. During the 2022 academic year, Dr Mukovhe Masutha was invited by the Chilean Government to sit on an International Panel of Experts advising the Chile's Ministry of Education on Free Education policies and public funding strategies for higher education. Towards the end of the year, Dr Masutha was also appointed Chairperson of the Advisory Committee of the Nurturing Emerging Scholars Programme (NESP), a pioneering initiative by the Ministry of Higher Education, Science and Innovation aimed at cultivating South Africa's pipeline of future scholars.
African research networks: The Centre links with major African research networks, such as Council for the Development of Social Science Research in Africa (CODESRIA) and the Organization for Social Science Research in Eastern and Southern Africa (OSREA) and membership of international associations, including African Network for Internationalisation of Education (ANIE), Comparative and International Education Society (CIES), and the World Congress of Comparative Education Societies (WCCES) - these relationships continue to grow. 
Facilitating this process is our representation in the WCCES Research Committee and the Education and Peace Committee, as well as in the CIES Higher Education and BANTABA interest groups. BANTABA is an Africa interest group and network of scholars within the CIES.

Book Projects and Special Issues Hosted by the Centre
Book 1: Creating the New African University
"Creating the New African University" is a newly edited volume that is co-edited by Prof Emnet Tadesse Woldegiorgis, Prof Shireen Motala and Dr Phefumula Nyoni. Featuring contributions from some of the most prominent scholars who have served in senior leadership positions in various universities, this book offers a diverse range of perspectives on the challenges and opportunities facing African universities in the 21st century. Contributors include Prof Saleem Badat, Prof Chris Brink, Prof Yusef Waghid, Prof André Keet, Prof Aslam Fataar, Prof Crain Soudien, Prof Saurabh Sinha, Prof Jane Knight, Prof Shireen Motala, Dr Mukovhe Masutha, Prof Uchenna Okeja, Prof Joseph C. A. Agbakoba and many more. With a wide range of perspectives and expertise represented, the book is sure to be a valuable resource for anyone interested in the future of African higher education. 
Creating the New African University grapples with the existence of African universities, particularly in postindependent Africa, where Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) are supposed to live up to the expectations of being adaptive in dealing with prevalent complex, dynamic contemporary and future challenges facing African societies. The book tackles the issue of what ought to be done for African universities to maintain a structure and identity that ensures their relevance in Africa's development through generating and transforming knowledge into actions for the common good. It engages issues within the context of how post-colonial transformative obligations have been managed considering the prevalent epistemological and pedagogical underpinnings that form the foundations of these universities as they seek to break from the clutches of colonial legacies.
This book further highlights an urgent need to do away with silos and embrace a multidisciplinary, interdisciplinary, transdisciplinary and cross-disciplinary dialogical approach towards knowledge generation. Such an approach is essential in efforts aimed at enhancing the sustainable reconfiguration of university structures and functions whilst linking knowledge produced to diverse social, economic and political facets of African societies in ways that promote and sustain competitiveness in a rapidly globalising world beset with technological advancements.
Here is the link for the book https://brill.com/display/title/68147#:~:text=Creating%20the%20New%20 African%20University%20grapples%20with%20the%20existence%20of,contemporary%20and%20future%20 challenges%20facing
Book 2: Higher Education Transformation in Africa
Led by Prof. Emnet Woldegiorgis, Dr Logan Govender and Dr Dennis Atibuni, the project is a dedication to the intellectual legacy of Prof. Michael Cross, the late founding director of AMCHES. This book is a two-volume collection of original, thought-provoking essays on critical issues in higher education transformation in Africa. Transformation in Africa: A Quest for an Epistemological Rupture (the first volume) and Transformation in Africa: Change and Continuity (the second volume) together explore the challenges facing higher education in Africa and the need for fundamental transformation to meet the needs of the continent. The book, to be published by Routledge Press, takes a critical approach to higher education, challenging traditional approaches and advocating for innovative and creative solutions that are better suited to the African context. The objective of the book project is to explore the main trends in the relationship between policy and change in African higher education systems by comparing the prevailing higher education (and related) policies and plans with the observable change that has taken place over time. Volume I of the book has been peer-reviewed and will be published in 2023, and Volume II is expected to be published towards the end of 2023 or early 2024. 
Book 3: Higher Education ICT Integration in Africa: Readiness, Implementation and Trajectory
Led by Prof. Ke Yu in collaboration with AMCHES, the project explores higher education's Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) integration in Africa, in the context of COVID 19 and the Fourth Industrial Revolution. The volume aims to contribute to a new and more inclusive change readiness framework and provide insights into conditions necessary for multi-level success or change readiness in ICT incorporation in HEIs in Africa. From the double-perspective of critical scholars and practical lessons for Higher Education administrators, management, and leadership, chapter contributions include intellectual and practical steps towards a more coherent change management mindset that can be used to better understand and manage ICT or other technological disruptions in resource restrained contexts. The book is scheduled for publication in 2024.
Book 4: The South African Democratic Teachers' Union (SADTU) and the Struggle for Professional Unionism
This  long-awaited book edited by Prof Michael Cross, Dr Logan Govender and Mr Ahmed Essop was published by UKZN Press in May 2023. The book provides an historical contextualization of SADTU's development from the 1980s to the present. It argues that despite the union's centrality in the education struggles of the past, SADTU's continued role and relevance in education have become the subject of intense debate in the public domain, as it is seen as more focused on unionism and the political battles of the Tripartite Alliance, led by the ANC, than on furthering teacher professionalism. The book explores how and why this has come about, what a reimagined future of education in South Africa looks like, and SADTU's relevance therein. 
Special Issue 1: Journal of Curriculum Perspectives:  
Prof. Emnet Woldegiorgis and Dr Irina Turner are jointly editing a special issue on the theme, Narrowing the Gap beyond Tokenism: The Transdisciplinary Search for Innovative Approaches in Decolonisation and the Integration and Dialogue among Indigenous Knowledge Systems and Epistemologies. Contributions by several AMCHES and UJ colleagues will be featured in this special issue journal, due for release in 2023.
Special Issue 2: African Journal of Teacher Education: 
Dr Phefumula Nyoni and Dr Sibonokuhle Ndlovu, assisted by Professor Emnet Tadesse Woldegiorgis and Dr Logan Govender have co-edited a special issue on the theme, Transition into a new African university in the Global South in the 21st Century. Published in 2023, this Special Issue reflects on historical trajectories, contemporary challenges, and future perspectives of African higher education systems. Drawing from diverse perspectives highlighting various conceptual, theoretical, methodological, and empirical aspects of higher education transformation, this special issue presents a collection of scholarly papers that are grounded in empirical evidence whilst also being conceptually rigorous. The papers featured in this special issue offer thought-provoking perspectives and inspire critical debate on the issue of the future of African higher education. These papers have been systematically arranged into four sub-thematic areas, namely, (i) Transitioning to the new African university, (ii) Experiences and emerging practices within the African university, (iii) Barriers and resilience, and (iv) The future of the new African university. Several members of AMCHES staff, PDRFs and postgraduate students have contributed to this special issue. 
Special Issue 3: Journal of Educational Studies: 
Dr Olaide Agbaje and Dr Otilia Chiramba, assisted by Prof Emnet Tadesse Woldegiorgis and Dr Logan Govender are co-editing a special issue on the theme, Disadvantaged Students' Resilience in Higher Education during Crisis. The special issue to be published in the Journal of Education Studies, hosted by the University of Venda, under the guidance of its editor-in-chief, Professor Felix Maringe, is due to be published early 2024, following some logistical challenges. 

Public Lectures and Book Launches
Public Lecture 1
Title: Perspectives on Pan-African Education
Presenter: Professor J Marah- State University of New York
Date: 12 March 2022
Theme: Decolonisaton 
Brief description: This thought-provoking lecture argued that Pan-African Education is the education of African people for continental African citizenship; this goes beyond the 'tribal', Islamic, neo-colonial, western hegemonic, and micro-nationalistic systems of education African countries have inherited from their most recent pasts Public Lecture 2
Title: Learning Whiteness: Education and the Settler Colonial State
Presenter/s: Professor A Sriprakash- University of Bristol, Professor S Rudolph, University of Melbourne, Professor J Gerrard, University of Melbourne
Date: 12 July 2022
Theme: Decolonisation
Brief description: As part of the AMCHES Lecture Series, Dr Masutha of University of Johannesburg hosted a Webinar with Prof Arathi Sriprakash of Bristol University and Sophie Rudolph of the University of Melbourne on their recently published book titled: Learning Whiteness: Education  and the Settler Colonial State. Participants explored various ways in which colonialism is reproduced in education and how an anti-racist programme can be mounted in response.
Public Lecture 3
Title: Predatory Samaritans, miseducation and an indentured settler-colonial state
Presenter: Dr M Masutha- University of Johannesburg
Date: 16 May 2022
Theme: Decolonisation
Brief description: Dr Mukovhe Masutha of University of Johannesburg was invited by King's College London to deliver a seminar based on his paper titled:  Predatory Samaritans, miseducation and an indentured settlercolonial state. Inspired by a combination of Jeffrey William's The Pedagogy of Debt, Carter G Woodson's Miseducation, Ha-Joon Chang's idea of Bad Samaritans and President Kwame Nkrumah's theory of Neo-colonial Client States, and to add to voices of free public HE and student debt abolition movements such as the Debt 
Collective, Dr Masutha critically reviewed the recommendations of the Ministerial Task Team Report and Judge Heher Report (both commissioned by the South African government). He advanced a case for freeing public higher education for all based on mutual aid, transitional and reparative justice. 
Public Lecture 4
Title: Grappling with Complex Contemporary Politics of Knowledge and Contested Meaning(s) of Decolonisation in Africa
Presenter: Prof Sabelo Ndlovu-Gatsheni, University of Bayreuth
Date: 25 Aug 2022
Theme: Decolonisation 
Brief description: As part of the AMCHES Lecture Series, Prof Ndlovu-Gatsheni of University of Bayreuth presented on Grappling with Complex Contemporary Politics of Knowledge and Contested Meaning(s) of 
Decolonisation in Africa. The lecture was well attended and stimulated debate on critical issues on the education decolonisation debate and higher education in Africa.

Book Launches
Book title: Knowledge Diplomacy in International Relations and Higher Education
Author: Jane Knight, University of Ontario
Date: 14 Feb 2023
Prof Knight provided an overview of the book, stressing the contemporary role of international higher education, research and innovation in international relations as an increasingly important phenomenon given the myriad of critical global challenges facing us. The book examines the major elements of knowledge diplomacy such as rationales, actors, values, modes of operation and activities. In the discussion that followed, the importance of soft power and cultural, science and public forms of diplomacy were explored, and current challenges identified, in the context of continuing global conflict as seen in the Russia-Ukraine war. 

Book title: Comparative Education for Global Citizenship, Peace and Shared Living through uBuntu
Editor/s: N'Dri Thérèse Assié-Lumumba, Michael Cross, Kanishka Bedi, and Sakunthala Ekanayake Date: 24 Mar 2023
In her overview presentation of the book, Prof N'Dri Assie-Lumumba highlighted the dire need today to create spaces in which people can make meaning of their existence in the world, abiding by cultural frameworks and practices that acknowledge and validate a meaningful existence for all. She elaborated how the book's emphasis on the African philosophy of uBuntu or humaneness is re-emerging for its timely relevance and potential as indispensable in our quest for global citizenship, peace, and mutual understanding in securing sustainable human development in the broader ecosystem. In addition, Comparative Education for Global Citizenship, Peace and Shared Living through Ubuntu paves the way for a better understanding of the critical importance of the collective search for and endeavor towards achieving the virtues of nonviolence, peace, shared values of living together, global citizenship, improved quality of life for all and a better appreciation of the positive implications of interdependence.
 

Book title: Higher Education in the Face of a Global Pandemic
Editors: Emnet Tadesse Woldegiorgis and Petronella Jonck
Date: 30 May 2023
The book reflects on the extent to which the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic influenced the education system in Africa, notably South Africa. The advent of the pandemic has brought a new context to the challenges of access, deepening the precarious position of African higher education systems. The pandemic underscored that African higher education systems are fragile and not uniformly resilient. The book discusses the challenges created or further entrenched by COVID-19 and how the typology of inequality across the differentiated institutions impacted the management of education delivery during COVID-19. Lessons learned were documented to inform decision-making and practice while drawing conclusions for future usage. Even though the shift to emergency remote teaching was not foreseen and thus not coordinated, the authors argue that students' learning styles, perceptions of online learning and digital pedagogy should be considered in the postCOVID-19 curricula development processes.

Book title: SADTU and the Struggle for Professional Unionism
Editors: Michael Cross, Logan Govender and Ahmed Essop
Date: 15 and 28 August 2023
The book provides an historical contextualization of SADTU's development from the 1980s to the present. It argues that despite the union's centrality in the education struggles of the past, SADTU's continued role and relevance in education have become the subject of intense debate in the public domain, as it is seen as more focused on unionism and the political battles of the Tripartite Alliance, led by the ANC, than on furthering teacher professionalism. The book explores how and why this has come about, what a reimagined future of education in South Africa looks like, and SADTU's relevance therein. 
 
Dr Logan Govender at the SADTU book launch in Durban,             Drs Logan Govender, David Matsepe, Sibonokuhle Ndlovu and 15 August 2023 Mr Ahmed Essop at the UJ, Auckland Park SADTU book launch, 
28 August 2023
In 2022 the following book launches were held:
Event 1
Book title: African Higher Education in the 21st Century: Epistemological, Ontological and Ethical Perspectives
Editor and Author: Ephraim Gwaravanda, Great Zimbabwe University
Amasa Ndofirepi, Sol Plaatjie University 
Date: 15 Mar 2022
The book critically reflects on philosophical aspects of African Higher Education through self-evaluation and self-criticism. The book interrogates knowledge claims, issues of identity and moral concerns within the context of universities in Africa. A robust discussion followed the presentation of an overview of the book's contents by the editors.
Event 2
Book title: Mediating Learning in Higher Education in Africa: From Critical thinking to Social Justice Pedagogies
Editor and Author: Ephraim Gwaravanda, Great Zimbabwe University
Amasa Ndofirepi, Sol Plaatjie University 
Date: 15 Mar 2022
The book focuses on teaching and learning in African Higher Education in the context of decolonisation and transformation debates. The book draws experiences from several Sub-Saharan African countries that include South Africa, Rwanda, Uganda and Zimbabwe. Members of the audience raised pertinent questions around the social justice project in higher education in the discussion that followed.
Event 3
Book title: Transformative Curricula, Pedagogies and Epistemologies: Teaching and Learning in Diverse Higher Education Contexts
Editors: Michael Cross, Caroline Long, Sibonokuhle Ndlovu and Phefumula Nyoni
Date: 26 Apr 2022
This book presents useful insights on the regeneration of curricula and pedagogies with a particular focus on universities in South Africa and Africa in general. It argues for rethinking pedagogies and epistemologies within African higher education that include African culture, values, ethics, and indigenous knowledge. Significantly, the book goes beyond mere narratives, as it explores decolonisation strategies suitable for transforming pedagogical and epistemological practices across the education system.

PhD Seminars
AMCHES continues to host several post-graduate seminars as part of its academic development programme. The seminars offer a constructive platform aimed at enhancing the quality of PhD proposals and work-inprogress, and are usually graced with the presence and participation of senior academics, PDRFS and other PhD students from the broader UJ community. The following seminars were held during 2023.
Seminar 1
Presentation title: Mitigating the Challenges of Learner Academic Performance in Sekhukhune East District Schools, Limpopo Province, South Africa 
Presenter: Mr Peter Mashilo
Date: 22 Mar 2023
Seminar 2
Presentation title: The problem with legal education: Exploring the teaching and learning of legal education in 
South Africa 
Presenter: Mr Spencer Mugezi
Date: 21 April 2023
Seminar 3
Presentation title: Integrating ICTs into the Development of Pre-service Secondary School Teachers: The Case of Teacher Training Colleges in Zimbabwe
Presenter: Ms Tendayi Dzinoreva 
Date: 25 July 2023
Writing Retreats
AMCHES writing retreats have become a regular scholarly development activity. The Centre strives to host at least two week-long writing retreats annually to provide the opportunity for staff and students to focus on the writing task. Invitation is by submitting a draft article in advance so that the time spent at the writing retreat is to maximise the opportunity towards completion and submission to a journal or book publication. Interactions, feedback and inputs are done informally. At the end of the writing retreat, participants must indicate how far they have progressed and what remains to be done before submission. In many instances, participants report a hundred percent completion, and in others anywhere between sixty to a hundred. Overall, participants have expressed appreciation for the opportunity just to think, seek guidance and write, away from the day-to-day work at the office. In 2022, two writing retreats were held: at Warmbaths, Limpopo province in May, and Dinokeng Game Reserve, north of Pretoria in November. In May 2023, a writing retreat was held at Warmbath's Resort.
Warmbaths, Limpopo Province, 8- 13 May 2022
The month of May was just as busy with the first of AMCHES' bi-annual writing retreat held in Warmbaths, Limpopo Province. Eleven members of the Centre participated with the sole purpose of refining their journal articles, a priority for AMCHES in 2022. In addition, flowing from the retreat, AMCHES launched two special issue journal proposals for 2023 which are managed by Dr Mukovhe Masutha, Dr Babalola Balogun and Dr Sindi Msimango under the supervision of Prof Emnet Woldegiorgis and Dr Logan Govender. These special issues are due to be published in 2023.

Members of AMCHES and the NRF/SarchI Chair for Teaching and Learning at the May 2022 writing retreat  
Ritsako Game Lodge, Dinokeng Game Reserve Pretoria, 13- 19 November 2022
Dr Phefumula Nyoni, AMCHES PDRF shares his experience of the Dinokeng retreat:
"The retreat provided an opportunity for meeting other colleagues and understanding their areas of interests. For example, it was during one of those discussions that I encountered Dr Otilia Chiramba who was writing a piece on university rankings, and I got great input from her on the subject of rankings. Sensing the richness of her input, our conversation resulted in a co-authored piece. The co-authorship injected some energy and resulted in expediting a paper that had been taking a while to complete. The retreat also presented an opportunity towards enrichment of ongoing work. For example, project presentations by Dr Tshepo Moloi and Dr Babalola Balogun, fellow PDRFs, received useful feedback on their research activities at AMCHES. Above all, as has been the writing retreat trend, some special issues under the editorial leadership of Dr Masutha and other colleagues were conceptualised".

 Writing retreat participants at Dinokeng, November 2022, in a relaxed pose after been congratulated on  progress made during the wrap-up session held on the final morning before departure.
Warmbaths, Limpopo Province, 21- 26 May 2023
The first of AMCHES' bi-annual writing retreats for 2023 was held in Warmbaths, Limpopo Province. Eleven members of the Centre, together with four from the NRF/Sarchi Chair for Teaching and Learning, participated with the sole purpose of refining their journal articles, an ongoing priority for AMCHES. Two journal special issues were planned. Dr. Otilia Chiramba from the Sarchi Chair for Teaching and Learning will be joining Drs Simon Vurayayi and Tsepo Moloi, to assist in working on a special issue on post-pandemic higher education challenges. In addition, AMCHES also  launched the first special issue journal proposal for 2024  on the theme 'The Rise of the Neoliberal University: Pitfalls, Challenges, Possibilities' which will be led by  Professor Mlamuli Hlatshwayo and Dr Tsepo Moloi, and supported by Prof Emnet Woldegiorgis and Dr Logan Govender. The two Special Issues are due to be published in 2024.
Publications from the Writing Retreats
Several publications have resulted from the writing retreat endeavours, which have contributed significantly to the overall research output of UJ. These outputs are reflected in the Publications section at the end of the newsletter. 
International Travels, Keynotes, and Paper Presentations by Staff 
Members and PDRFs: Highlights (2023 and 2022)
Presentation 1
Title: "Who is Black in 'Refiguring in Balack'?
Event: JIAS Actuvirtual Symposium
Presenter:  Professor E Woldegiorgis
Venue: JIAS, University of Johannesburg 
Date: 31 August 2023 
Presentation 2
Title: Negotiating the 'third space': Power dynamics and space-making in virtual/remote learning in the context of higher education
Event: Annual Conference of Reconfiguring African Studies through Spatialities
Presenter:  Professor E Woldegiorgis
Venue: University of Bayreuth, Germany
Date: 12 -14 October 2023
Presentation 3
Title: Re-thinking the internationalization of higher education in South Africa in a post-pandemic era: Towards a blended future
Event: 13th African Network for Internationalization of Education (ANIE) International Conference
Presenter:  Professor E Woldegiorgis
Venue: Zanzibar, Tanzania
Date: 4- 6 October 2023
Presentation 4
Title: Hybrid Knowledge and the Quest to Move Beyond Settled Dichotomies 
Event: Conference on Beyond Decolonisation
Presenter:  Professor E Woldegiorgis Venue: SOAS University of London.
Date: 8-10 October 2023
Presentation 5
Title: Rethinking partnership in higher education and development cooperation between the Global South and North
Event: The annual forum for the Norwegian Cooperation for Sustainable Development in Higher Education Group (NDHG)
Presenter: Professor E Woldegiorgis Venue: Oslo, Norway. 
Date: 8-10 November 2023
Presentation 6
Title: The tragedy of neoliberalism and the decline of African scholarship: A critical reflection
Event: International conference on the theme "Negotiating the Fabric of the African University:
Global Trends and Local Realities
Presenter: Prof Emnet Woldegiorgis
Venue: Cape Town, South Africa Date: 12- 14 September 2023
Presentation 7
Title: Reconstructing the social responsibilities of African universities towards citizenship education: Perspectives from the ujamaa philosophy of Julius Nyerere
Event: Conference on Narrowing the Gap beyond Tokenism, Volkswagen  Foundation (AMCHES in collaboration with University of Bayreuth
Presenter:  Prof Emnet Woldegiorgis
Venue: Sandton, Johannesburg
Date: 20-23 February 2022
Presentation 8
Title: Beyond the neoliberal university: Decolonizing the public university in the time of neoliberal colonization in South Africa
Second presentation title: Conceptualising higher education transformation and decolonization.
Event: Annual Learning and Teaching Imbizo
Presenter:  Professor M Hlatshwayo Venue: Durban University of Technology Date: 10- 13 October 2023.
Presentation 9
Title: Advocating for a Decolonised University for Epistemic Access and Success
Event: The International Conference on Language, Multilingualism And Decolonization Practices In Higher Education.
Presenter:  Professor M Hlatshwayo
Venue: University of Free State
Date: 12-14 July 2023
Presentation 10
Title: Troubling pedagogic "excellence": Meditations on the decolonial turn in the National Excellence in Teaching and Learning Awards
Event: HELTASA FEST 2022
Presenter: Professor M Hlatshwayo
Venue: Virtual
Date: 2-5 December 2022
Presentation 11
Title: The SA higher education policy landscape:  is it keeping pace?
Event: PWC 29th annual education conference
Presenter:  Professor Thandi Lewin 
Venue: Cape Town
Date: 22 August 2023
Presentation 12
Title: The State of funding in South Africa and its impact on higher education
Event: South African Association for Institutional Research (SAAIR) symposium 
Presenter:  Professor Thandi Lewin
Venue: Sefako Makgatho Health Sciences University (virtual)
Date: 30 August 2023
Presentation 13
Title: The role of teacher unions in South Africa in advancing collaboration in the basic education sector
Event: National Education Collaboration Trust (NECT) 10th anniversary education convention
Presenter:  Dr Logan Govender
Venue: Birchwood Hotel, Boksburg
Date: 11-12 September 2023
Presentation 14
Title: Impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on social inequalities of the South African education system
Event: Journal of Education Studies Inaugural Conference
Presenters:  Drs Baleni Sibanda and Logan Govender
Venue: Kruger National Park, Skukuza
Date: 28 - 30 July 2023
Presentation 15
Title: Challenges of researching students' epistemic access under COVID-19 in the African higher education sector
Event: 5th World Council of Comparative Education Societies (WCCES) Symposium
Presenter:  Dr Logan Govender
Venue: Online
Date: 16-18 November 2022

Short Learning Programmes (SLPs)
Six short learning programmes (SLPs) in the field of higher education studies were developed by Professor Emnet Woldegiorgis in 2022. After consultation with staff members of the Centre, the SLPs were submitted to the Faculty and approved by the University for implementation. Drs Logan Govender and Mukovhe Masutha have been coordinating the launching of the SLP programme. These SLPs are designed for online study to accommodate a diverse set of candidates including working adults. The six SLPs are: Introduction to Economics of Higher Education; Approaches and Theories in Transformation of Higher Education; Development of Higher Education Systems in Africa; Governance, Leadership, and Management in Higher Education; Teaching and Learning in Higher Education and Issues, Challenges and Processes in Higher Education Research.
In the second semester of 2023, the centre will be delivering its first SLP, Teaching and Learning in Higher Education, coordinated by Prof Mlamuli Hlatshwayo. AMCHES short learning programmes are pitched at master's level, and the Centre will eventually be applying for it to be approved to be offered as a master's degree programme. When that happens, these SLPs may be considered as credits towards a master's degree. The SLPs encompass both policy and research-based training that will allow graduates to forge careers in and outside of academia. This innovative programme is designed to prepare the next generation of scholars, researchers, policy advocates, and leaders in the field of higher education in Africa and beyond. The proposed programme is intended  to be offered predominantly on an online basis.

PhDs and Postgraduate students and their research areas 
The centre is also host to several post-graduate students at doctoral and master's levels. These include the following:
•    Peter Phafane Mashilo, PhD topic: Mitigating the challenges of learner academic performance in Sekhukhune East district schools, Limpopo province, South Africa (drafting thesis)
•    Tendayi Dzinoreva, PhD topic: Integrating ICTs into the Development of Pre-service Secondary School Teachers: The Case of Teacher Training Colleges in Zimbabwe (Submitted for examination)
•    Eckson Khambule, PhD topic: The primary school principals' experiences in supporting school teachers living with HIV at Sedibeng East education district (Submitted for examination)
•    William Olufemi Folaranmi, PhD topic: Intersectionality and students' perceptions of decolonization of the curriculum. A case study of two departments in the Faculty of Education at the University of Johannesburg (Proposal stage)
•    Spencer Mugezi, PhD topic: The problem with legal education? Exploring the teaching and learning of legal education in South Africa (drafting thesis)
•    Ntombizonke Magugushe, Master's topic: First year students' experiences in transitioning from school to university (drafting thesis)
•    Andiswa Ngalonkulu, Master's topic: Theorising Black students' experiences of mental health in higher education (Awaiting ethics approval)
•    Konaye Masiba, Master's topic: Young, Black and rural in a South African University (proposal stage) The Centre is planning an intake of at least four additional PhD students for 2024.

Introducing New Staff and PDRFs 
Associate Professor: Professor Mlamuli Hlatshwayo
Mlamuli Nkosingphile Hlatshwayo is an Associate Professor at Ali Mazrui's Centre for Higher Education Studies at the University of Johannesburg, South Africa. Prof Hlatshwayo has over 20 peer-reviewed publications, over 25 national and international conference presentations and over 20 invited seminars/public lecturers across the South African, American, British and Indian higher education institutions. He holds a 
  PhD in Higher Education Studies and a Masters' degree (cum laude) in Political and International Studies from Rhodes University. Prof Hlatshwayo was a visiting scholar at the University of Connecticut's Neag School of Education for 2018-2019. He was the 2020 Mail & Guardian 200 Young South Africans-education, the Jakes Gerwel Distinguished Fellow in Education, as well as the 2021-2025 Andrew W. Mellon Early Career Fellow in higher education. He served as a member of the Council on Higher Education's 20-year national review of the South African higher education system in 2019-2020. He is the current project manager in the Heltasa's National Interest Group on Decolonisation. Prof Hlatshwayo's co-edited book, Decolonising Knowledge and Knowers: Struggles for University Transformation in South Africa, was published with Routledge in 2022.
Areas of interest: Higher education transformation and decolonisation; rethinking higher education; neoliberalism in higher education; Black students and academics in higher education.
Associate Professor: Professor Thandi Lewin
Thandi Lewin is an Associate Professor in the Ali Mazrui Centre for Higher Education Studies and the Department of Education Management and Leadership in the Faculty of Education at the University of Johannesburg. Prior to joining UJ, she worked in the Department of Higher Education and Training (DHET) as the Chief Director for Institutional Governance and Management Support in the University Education branch. Her responsibilities included student funding policy, oversight of NSFAS, university governance oversight, and student development and support matters, amongst other areas. In previous roles in the Department, she coordinated the development of a National Plan for Post-School Education and Training and worked in the field of Equity in Education and University Policy. She has extensive experience in higher education 
policy, education and social justice, education monitoring and evaluation, and education management and governance. She holds a Bachelor of Social Science degree from the University of Cape Town, a Master's in Education and International Development from University College London Institute of Education, and a PhD from the University of the Free State.
Areas of interest: Higher Education Policy, Gender in Higher Education, Academic Careers, Leadership, 
Management and Governance in Higher Education, Funding of Higher Education and the history of Higher Education Policy.
Lecturer: Dr Sibonokuhle Ndlovu
Dr Sibonokuhle Ndlovu is a lecturer at the Ali Mazrui Centre for Higher Education Studies, University of Johannesburg, South Africa. She has published over 20 peerreviewed publications and has presented her work in national and international conferences. She holds a PhD in Inclusive Education from the University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg and a Master's in Education degree, with First Class 
(Cum Laude) from the University of Cape Town. She is a recipient of the University of Johannesburg certificate of excellence award for outstanding achievement in research and academic citizenship in the postdoctoral research programme, 2019. She is the lead editor of the book, Social, Educational, and Cultural Perspectives of Disabilities in the Global South (2021),  published by IGI Global publishers  and a co-editor  of the book,  Transformative Curricula, Pedagogies and Epistemologies (2021) published by Brill Publishers. 
Areas of interest: disability in higher education, disability and gender in the Global South, teaching and learning of students with disabilities in higher education, disability and policy in higher education, decolonisation and disability, disability, gender and rurality.

Postdoctoral Research Fellows
Dr Alois Baleni Sibanda
Dr Alois Baleni Sibanda completed his PhD at the University of the Witwatersrand, entitled Violence and Social Cleavages during 2015/16 FeesMustFall student movement: A case study of Wits University, South Africa. He was awarded a one-year Queen Elizabeth II Jubilee Award Pre-Doctoral Research Fellowship from March 2019 to February 2020 as visiting scholar at the University of Winnipeg, Canada, and the University of the Witwatersrand. 
Areas of interest: Student epistemic access and success, theorisation of higher education, focusing on student protests and social movements in the context of higher education transformation and decolonisation. 
Dr Juliet Munyaradzi
Dr Juliet Munyaradzi completed her PhD in Education at the University of South Africa in 2022. Her thesis is entitled Perceptions of senior academics and postgraduate students on the decolonisation of curriculum at a distance e-learning institution in South Africa. She is currently a postdoctoral fellow at the Ali Mazrui Centre for Higher Education Studies, University of Johannesburg, in South Africa. 
Areas of interest: decolonisation of higher education, language policy, multilingualism in education and issues of equity and access in higher education.
Dr Simon Vurayai 
Dr Simon Vurayai is a senior post-doctoral research fellow with Ali Mazrui Centre for Higher Education Studies. He holds Doctor of Education Degree in Socio-Education. Dr Simon Vurayai has over 25 publications to his credit. He is a co-editor of 3 book volumes and a sole author of 1 book that have been published so far. 
Areas of interest: sociology of knowledge and the curriculum, higher education, digital sociology, sociology of inequality, and gender studies.
Dr Babalola Balogun
Dr. Babalola Joseph Balogun obtained his PhD in Philosophy of Mind (with special interest in the Problem of Other Minds) from the Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife, Nigeria. His articles have appeared in Filosofia Theoretica: Journal of African 
Philosophy, Culture and Religions; Thought and Practice: A Journal of the Philosophical Association of Kenya; Yoruba Studies Review; Inkanyiso: The Journal of Humanities and Social Sciences; Caribbean Journal of Philosophy; among others. He is currently a postdoctoral research fellow at the Ali Mazrui Centre for Higher Education Studies (AMCHES), University of Johannesburg, South Africa.
Areas of interest: Philosophy of Mind, Existentialism, African Philosophy, African Ethics, Decolonization Studies.
Dr Monicah Kanyesigye Rullonga
Dr Monicah Rullonga is a Post-doctoral Research Fellow at AMCHES. She has 23 years of management experience in institutions of higher education and Non-Governmental Organisations, with vast experience in stakeholder engagement, grants administration and accountability, employee growth, risk management, and organizational development. She has a background in social sciences, master's in human resource management in education and a PhD in Public Administration and Management.  
Areas of interest: Governance and institutional leadership, higher education management
Dr Emmanuel Intsiful 
Dr Emmanuel Intsiful has ten years of experience teaching in higher education in different countries. In 2019 he was selected as part of the young scholars' conference during the 42nd Comparative International Education Society Conference in San Francisco, USA. Emmanuel works across various linguistic and geographic contexts at the intersection of the humanities and social sciences on a wide range of educational issues. He has taught in Ghana, China, and Australia. Emmanuel is currently a postdoctoral research fellow at the Ali Mazuri Centre for Higher Education Studies at the University of Johannesburg. 
Areas of interest: critical sociology of higher education, higher education policy, critical pedagogy, Foucauldian studies, post-colonialism, poststructuralism, educational leadership, management, and governance.
PhD Graduates
Dr Naziema Jappie, AMCHES PhD graduate 
I am thrilled to have graduated with a PhD from the University of Johannesburg (UJ), an important milestone in my life. It is so fulfilling to me both personally and professionally to finally get here. Words can't begin to express my appreciation and gratitude to everyone, especially to the Late Prof Michael Cross, my supervisor, who was not present to celebrate my graduation! The journey to earning my degree was, at times, a struggle, but the outcome was so rewarding and well worth it! Prof Cross helped me make that happen, for always supporting me and offering words of encouragement along the way. His thoughtfulness and insight were a gift I will forever treasure. A simple thanks may not be enough, but I'm still sending this note to express my heartfelt gratitude. Prof Cross has fostered confidence and passion in me to work hard and pursue my dreams with no boundaries.
Dr David Matsepe, AMCHES PhD graduate
David Matsepe head of research at South African Democratic Teachers Union (SADTU), under the supervision of the late Professor Michael Cross graduated with a PhD degree from the University of Johannesburg on 18 July 2022. The title of his thesis was 'Understanding academic identity within subjectivity and agency in selected South African Universities'. 
Dr Mzamani Mdaka, AMCHES PhD Graduate
Mzamani graduated with a PhD under the supervision of Professors Morapeng 
Modiba and Mdu Ndlovu on 4 May 2023. His thesis topic is Instructional time for Grade 7 Mathematics: Teaching for participation and subjectively meaningful learning in Vhembe District. 
Opinion Piece 1
Colonial Education in Africa: The Necessity to Decolonise it! 
Ellen Makhubela, Honours student and research intern at AMCHES
Lingering colonialism is a significant reality in most third-world countries, more particularly in Africa. Western colonial agencies define what education should look like. We need to ask ourselves, "Is this an inevitable reality for Africans or is it necessary to reduce the extent to which colonial powers influence Africa's education?". In the pre-colonial era in South Africa, Africans had their own educational practises based on the transmission of indigenous knowledge from adult to child. The African child was raised by the community and educated in the culture and traditions of the community. Colonialism was accompanied by indoctrination, leading to the imposition of a European worldview, which was largely responsible not only for undermining the existing educational projects, but also for enslaving the minds of African indigenous people. During the apartheid era, Bantu education perpetuated the colonial racist education agenda. 
Postcolonial education in Africa today must contend with the effects of colonisation on culture and social life. African universities' epistemological traditions continue to be influenced by Western knowledge canons. African students continue to learn about their continent from a largely Western lens. They continue to produce knowledge drawing largely on ideas and theories of Western scholars in order to be recognised by their European counterparts and play the ranking game. Graduates from African universities are ill-suited to the African market and conditions. It is in this respect that decolonising African education is necessary. In curriculum development, schools, colleges, and universities should develop respect for people's indigenous cultural and knowledge systems, as well as respect for the coexistence of cultural diversity. In South Africa, education's content and knowledge foundations must be de-racialised. This is not to say that black professors are better suited to masking Eurocentric biases in education; both black and white professors must choose to unlearn and relearn new pedagogy and methods of teaching future generations.
The 2015 #RhodesMustFall and #FeesMustFall movement campaigns are a great example African students' initiative to decolonise colonial education and their institutions. Foremost, students wanted knowledge and power to be rooted in African philosophy as a self-conscious discipline. These movements called for the decolonisation and Africanisation in higher education content and pedagogies. The movement achieved several positive outcomes in South African tertiary education institutions, including the renaming of university buildings and schools, curriculum transformation, and the insourcing of general workers. Students stressed the tailoring of higher education curricula and academic programmes to reflect African perspectives. A key focus was to enable African universities to reclaim the epistemological terrain and ways of knowing, decide what African education should look like and produce graduates who can draw on African perspectives and contribute to the transformation of African post-colonial education. 
Let us all move forward from this initiative! It is necessary to decolonise our minds, our education, our institutions, the curriculum and ourselves! 

Opinion Piece 2
A focus on supervision Resilience in doctoral supervision 
By Sibonokuhle Ndlovu, Senior PDRF, Ali Mazrui Centre for Higher Education Studies
The supervisor was resilient and, so too, the student. Resilience combined yielded success. The supervisor was none other than the late legendary Professor Michael Cross and the student, brave Dr. Bernard Ungadi Akala, who lives with a disability and is currently based in Geneva, Switzerland. 
There is no success without resilience. During the supervision journey of Professor Michael Cross and Bernard Akala, tragedy struck and Bernard became extremely sick, to the point that after a series of brain surgeries, he became disabled. Everything could have ended there. However, resilience by the supervisor and student saw the journey of supervision continuing despite the crisis that had struck unexpectedly. As their journey unfolded, the supervisor realized the importance of preparing for a crisis, an indication of forethought and transformative resilience. He knew that anything could happen in the process of supervision and when it indeed happened, he would not be deterred. 
The student Bernard had imbibed a kind of adaptive resilience. He knew that when adversity strikes, he had to bounce back. His disability, which came late in life, could have stopped his dream abruptly but he resisted. He had to learn new skills to do things differently, so he could carry on with his doctoral research. His speech had become slurred, but he presented in conferences, and he continued writing his research chapters. The journey was not easy for both because they had to unlearn and relearn. Michael Cross had to adjust his supervision skills because he was then supervising a student living with a disability, who was not disabled at the beginning. So as supervisor, he too, had to develop adaptive resilience.
Adaptive resilience by the student, and anticipative and transformative resilience by the supervisor, all combined to ensure the process of the doctoral journey. When Professor Cross visited Bernard in Geneva, where he was attending a conference, he was moved to exclaim to him that there were those who were not disabled yet they struggled to work hard and express their ability. He promised to use Bernard's experience to motivate other PhD students.  Through the resilience of both, Bernard completed his doctoral study against all odds, and today he is the proud, Dr Bernard Ungadi Akala. And Professor Michael Cross's amazing supervision legacy lives on. 
This is a story of success through resilience. It teaches the world to be prepared for adversity and that adversity must not deter them. When confronted with a crisis, explore alternative ways of doing things, as sometimes adversity is for the better. Disability does not equal inability and should  be a limitation!  As demonstrated by Dr Bernard Akala and Prof Michael Cross, adversity can be seen as opportunity to build resilience and advance one's journey towards success. 

Opinion Piece 3
Positive and nurturing student-supervisor relationships, the anchor to postgraduate studies   Tendayi Dzinoreva, PhD student

I remember vividly the excitement of starting my PhD, it seemed as if the degree had already been acquired and I was soaring on the success of my hard work. But alas, this journey is not a smooth sailing one, there is no straight and narrow path. It is indeed a journey of twists and turns. I am still exploring my ideas and trying to convince my supervisors that I have the hang of things and tapping into the vast wealth of knowledge and experience they possess. Being a doctoral candidate at the Al Mazrui Centre for Higher Education (AMCHES) has helped me to realize how important student support, mentorship and engagement is. I remember with gratitude and awe the enigmatic supervisor that the late Prof Michael Cross was. He was always ready to crack a joke or two to make the most challenging of situations better. My first experience of this supportive and driven academic was at my first proposal presentation in March, 2020. Having been on the bus for more than 18 hours from Zimbabwe, I was tired and not feeling very confident of my decision to pursue the doctoral studies. My proposal presentation was presided over by a panel of very serious looking academics, but as soon as the late Professor Cross walked in all my fears and jitters disappeared. He was warm and encouraging, actions that are critical for the integration of any student into a higher education institution. His ever-ringing words "I do not want you to pursue this as an academic but as one looking to make a difference in education. Your doctorate must be meaningful and transform lives." May his dear soul rest in eternal peace! 
To say I was lucky would be an understatement, I was blessed to have another dedicated supervisor in my corner, Dr. George Mavunga who has stood by me and urged me on when it was getting tough. The Covid period was not an easy one, with the banning of travel and slow movement of document processing procedures, I would only raise the alarm that I was drowning and he would come to my rescue. The student-supervisor relationship must go beyond just academic guidance but must also take into consideration the mental wellbeing of the parties involved. Not that we do not disagree on an academic level, but it is always done with great respect and acknowledgement of the importance of one's views. 
Effective mentors create opportunities for mentees. My journey so far has been made easier through the various opportunities that are constantly being pushed my way by my supervisors, particularly Dr. Logan Govender, who constantly pushes me to write papers and collaborate with him in various projects. While this road is hard and requires a lot of dedication and sacrifice, I would not trade it for anything because of the immense support that I am receiving.
 List of Publications
(AMCHES members' names are highlighted in bold )
2023 PUBLICATIONS Journal Articles Published
Agbaje, O. (2023). Intra-Africa student mobility: benefits for Africa and factors militating against it. African Journal of Teacher Education, 12(2 Special Issue), 144-161.
Agbaje, O. (2023). Curriculum reform in African higher education: solving society's problems and meeting its needs. Curriculum Perspectives, 43 (suppl 1), 141-149.
Agumba, H., Simpson, Z., & Ndofirepi, A. (2023). Towards understanding the influence of rurality on students' access to and participation in higher education. Critical Studies in Teaching and Learning (CriSTaL), 11(1), 22-42. 
Ansah, F., Swanzy, P., & Langa, P. (2023). Mapping higher education policymaking in Ghana with a quadruple helix framework. Policy Reviews in Higher Education, 1-19.
Assié-Lumumba, N. D. T. Samir Amin the African, Global Giant, and Epitome of uBuntu in Tireless Pursuit of the 'Highest Level of Human Civilization'. Bandung, 10(1), 16-32.
Balogun, B. J., & Woldegiorgis, E. T. (2023). Combating colonial mentality within higher learning spaces: The case of sub-Saharan African universities. African Journal of Teacher Education, 12(2 Special Issue), 94-118.
Balogun, B. J. (2023). How not to Understand Community: A Critical Engagement with R. Bellah. Conatus-Journal of Philosophy, 8(1), 55-76.
Balogun, B. J. (2023). In Search of Authentic Personhood: An Existentialist Reading of Femi Osofisan's Tẹgẹnni: An African Antigone. International Journal of African Renaissance Studies-Multi-, Inter-and Transdisciplinarity, 18(1), 24-46.
Balogun, B. J. (2023). Building an authentic African philosophy of education based on the African concept of personhood. Curriculum Perspectives, 43 (suppl 1), 151-164.
Govender, L., & Naidoo, D. (2023). Decolonial insights for transforming the higher education curriculum in South Africa. Curriculum Perspectives, 43 (suppl 1), 59-71.
Hlatshwayo, M. (2023). Decolonising the South African University: First Thoughts. South African Journal of Higher Education, 37(3), 100-112.
Hlatshwayo, M., Zondi, T., & Mokoena, T. (2023). It gives me anxiety! Black Academics' experiences of teaching large classes during the Covid-19 pandemic in a South African university. Perspectives in Education, 41 (2), 104-114.
Hlatshwayo, M., & Ngcobo, B. (2023). "Doing Just Enough to Get By": Voices of Black Women Early Career Academics on Navigating the Publish or Perish Discourse in South Africa. Education as Change, 27, 1-21.
Kibona, B., & Woldegiorgis, E. T. (2023). Reconstructing the social responsibilities of African universities towards citizenship education: perspectives from the ujamaa philosophy of Julius Nyerere. Curriculum Perspectives, 43 (suppl 1), 165-174.
Mashilo, P. P., & Govender, L. (2023). African identity and curriculum transformation at universities in South Africa. African Journal of Teacher Education, 12(2 Special Issue), 119-143.
Masutha, M. (2023). Against the pedagogy of debt in South African higher education. African Journal of Teacher Education, 12(2 Special Issue), 48-68.
Ndaipa, C. J., Edström, K., Langa, P., & Geschwind, L. (2023). Internationalisation of the curriculum in higher education: A case from a Mozambican university. Cogent Education, 10(1), 2188773.
Ndlovu-Gatsheni, S. J. (2023). Intellectual imperialism and decolonisation in African studies. Third World Quarterly, 1-18.
Ndlovu-Gatsheni, S. J. (2023). Beyond the coloniser's model of the world: towards reworlding from the Global South. Third World Quarterly, 1-17.
Ndlovu, S., & Woldegiorgis, E. T. (2023). 'Nothing for us without us': Exclusion of students with disabilities in disability policy review at a South African institution of higher education. African Journal of Teacher Education, 12(1), 179-201.
Ndlovu, S. (2023). Indigenous Knowledge Systems in Africa: exclusion of students with disabilities in South African higher education. Curriculum Perspectives, 43 (suppl 1), 127-140.
Ndlovu, S. (2023). Academics with disabilities during transformation to a New African University in South Africa. African Journal of Teacher Education, 12(2 Special Issue), 69-93.
Ndlovu, S. (2023). Preparedness and Response to COVID-19 Disruptions and Learning Challenges for Students with Disabilities in South Africa: A Systematic Review. Sustainability, 15(2), 1420.
Nyoni, P. (2023). The politics of decolonising the curriculum through adopting mother tongue instruction in a South African historically disadvantaged university setting.  Curriculum Perspectives, 43 (suppl 1), 47-57.
Santos, Í., & Pekkola, E. (2023). Policy entrepreneurs in the global education complex: The case of Finnish education experts working in international organisations. International Journal of Educational Development, 98, 102749.
Vurayai, S. (2023). An Assessment of Parental Involvement in the Supplementary Feeding Programme in Early Childhood Development in Rural Southern Africa. African Journal of Development Studies (formerly AFFRIKA Journal of Politics, Economics and Society), 13(2), 115-134.
Woelert, P. (2023). Administrative burden in higher education institutions: a conceptualisation and a research agenda. Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management, 1-14.
Woldegiorgis, E. T., & Monari, K. (2023). Access and politics of higher education for refugees: Comparative contexts from Uganda and Ethiopia. African Journal of Teacher Education, 12(2 Special Issue), 1-19.

In- Press
Adem, S., & Babagana, A. W. (2023). Is Africa China's neo-dependency in the making?. Third World Quarterly, 1-17. 
Adams, A. Z., Intsiful, E., Zagoon-Sayeed, H., & Essuman, A. (2023). Examining public perception on Technical and Vocational Education and Training enrolment in Ghana. International Journal of Training Research, 1-18. 
Woldegiorgis, E.T. & Yu, C.Q. (Eds.) (2023). Critical Reflections on the Internationalisation of Higher Education in the Global South: A Sociological Exploration. Emerald Publishing.

Book chapters
Published
Agbakoba, J. C. (2023). Decolonisation, Trans-Colonisation and Development: The Challenges of Changing Epistemic Concerns and Indigenous Knowledge Production in Africa. In E.T. Woldegiorgis, S. Motala, and P. Nyoni (Eds.) Creating the New African University (pp. 106-129). Brill.
Cross, M., & Ndlovu. S. (2023). Dilemmas of Unionism and Professionalism in the Promotion of Teacher Accountability. In M. Cross, L. Govender and A. Essop (Eds.) SADTU and the Struggle for Professional Unionism. (pp. 157-182). UKZN Press.
Cross, M., & Matsepe, D. (2023). Leaders, Leadership and Change in SADTU. In M. Cross, L. Govender and A. Essop (Eds.) SADTU and the Struggle for Professional Unionism. (pp. 183-214). UKZN Press.
Essop, A. (2023). SADTU's Future Role in the South African Education Landscape. In M. Cross, L. Govender and A. Essop (Eds.) SADTU and the Struggle for Professional Unionism. (pp. 215-234). UKZN Press.
Govender, L., & Cross, M. (2023). Teacher Unions and Policy-Making in South Africa: Exclusion, Contestation and Collaboration. In M. Cross, L. Govender and A. Essop (Eds.) SADTU and the Struggle for Professional Unionism. (pp.85-116). UKZN Press.
Govender, L., (2023). Organisational Development and Efficiency: Key Ingredients for Professional Unionism. In M. Cross, L. Govender and A. Essop (Eds.) SADTU and the Struggle for Professional Unionism. (pp. 117-156). UKZN Press.
Gwaravanda, E. T., & Ndofirepi, A. P. (2023). Cognitive Justice as Social Justice in Postcolonial Africa: The Idea of the University in the North-South Dialectic. In A.P Ndofirepi, S. Vurayai and G. Erima (Eds.) Unyoking African University Knowledge (pp. 64-82). 
Brill.
Knight, J. (2023). African Higher Education Programme and Provider Mobility Partnerships. In E.T. Woldegiorgis, S. Motala and P. Nyoni (Eds.) Creating the New African University (pp. 274-293). Brill.
Lehoko, K. (2023). The Influence of COSATU on the Evolution and development of SADTU: An Insider's Perspective. In M. Cross, L. Govender and A. Essop (Eds.) SADTU and the Struggle for Professional Unionism. (pp. 69-84). UKZN Press.
Marah, J. K. (2023). What I Mean by Pan-African Education and Its Implications for African People in Our Global Village. In E.T Woldegiorgis, S. Motala and P. Nyoni, (Eds.) Creating the New African University (pp. 130-156). Brill.
Masutha, M. (2023). Non-completion amongst black working-class students in South African universities: The dangers of a single story. In R. J. Tierney, F. Rizvi & K. Erkican (Eds.) International Encyclopaedia of Education (Fourth Edition) (pp. 356-366). Elsevier. 
Ndofirepi, A. P. (2023). Gender, Disability and Rurality: Decoding the Themes in the African University Milieu. In A.P Ndofirepi, F. Maringe, S. Vurayai and G. Erima (Eds.) Decolonising African University Knowledge's, Volume 1 (pp. 1-7). Routledge.
Ndofirepi, A. P. (2023). The African University in Pursuit of an Emancipatory Knowledge Trajectory: Deciphering the Dialogues. In A.P. Ndofirepi, S. Vurayai and G. Erima. (Eds.) Unyoking African University Knowledge (pp. 1-9). Brill.
Ndlovu, S. (2023). Improving Processes, Practices and Structures in South African Higher Education: Voices of Students with Disabilities. In A.P. Ndofirepi, F, Maringe, S. Vurayai and G. Erima (Eds.) Decolonising African University Knowledge's, Volume 1 (pp. 22-38). Routledge.
Ndlovu, S (2023). Experiences of students with disabilities of their obstacles to throughput is professional degree in South African higher education: A decolonial perspective. In D. Chiwandire and L. Vincent (Eds.) Making the circle bigger: South African Higher Education, social justice and students with disabilities. Palgrave.
Ndofirepi, A. P. (2023). Gender, Disability, Rurality, and Social Injustice in the African University: Opportunities Going Forward. In A.P. Ndofirepi, F. Maringe, S. Vurayai and G. Erima (Eds.) Decolonising African University Knowledge's, Volume 1 (pp. 126-131). Routledge.
Ndofirepi, A. P. (2023). Questioning the Neoliberal Agenda: What is to Know in the African University? In A.P. Ndofirepi, F. Maringe, S. Vurayai G. Erima (Eds.) Decolonising African University Knowledge's, Volume 2 (pp. 1-10). Routledge.
Ndofirepi, A. P., & Gwaravanda, E. T. (2023). Can/Should African Universities be World-Class? A Critical Purview. In A.P. Ndofirepi, F. Maringe, S. Vurayai and G. Erima (Eds.) Decolonising African University Knowledge's, Volume 2 (pp. 11-31). Routledge.
Ndofirepi, A. P. (2023). The African University in the Neoliberal Era: In Pursuit of Socially-Just Knowledge's in the 21st Century. In A.P. Ndofirepi, F. Maringe, S. Vurayai and G. Erima (Eds.) Decolonising African University Knowledge's, Volume 2 (pp. 32-50). Routledge.
Ndofirepi, A. P. (2023). The Hermeneutics of a Liberated Knowledge Fund in an African University: Winding Up the Business. In A.P. 
Ndofirepi, S. Vurayai and G. Erima (Eds.) Unyoking African University Knowledge (pp. 179-188). Brill.
Rensburg, I. (2023). SADTU and the Origins of Professional Unionism, 1976-1995. In M. Cross, L. Govender and A. Essop (Eds.) SADTU and the Struggle for Professional Unionism. (pp. 27-68). UKZN Press.
Vurayai, S. (2023). Knowledge democracy and feminist epistemic struggle in African universities. In A.P. Ndofirepi, F. Maringe, S. Vurayai and G.  Erima (Eds.) Decolonising African University Knowledge's, Volume 1 (pp. 84-102). Routledge.
Vurayai, S. (2023). From Academic Coconuts to Knowledge Custodians: Redefining a New Epistemic Trajectory for an African University. In A.P. Ndofirepi, F. Maringe, S. Vurayai and G.  Erima (Eds.) Unyoking African University Knowledge (pp. 97-119). 
Brill.
Woldegiorgis, E. T. (2023). The Dynamics of Globalisation and Internationalisation Processes Shaping the Policies for African Higher Education. In B.K Daniel and R. Bisaso (Eds.) Higher Education in Sub-Saharan Africa in the 21st Century: Pedagogy, Research and Community-Engagement (pp. 87-105). Springer Nature Singapore.
Woldegiorgis, E. T. (2023). Changes and Continuity in the Roles and Functions of Higher Education in Sub-Saharan Africa. In E.T. Woldegiorgis, S. Motala and P. Nyoni (Eds.) Creating the New African University (pp. 40-66). Brill.
Woldegiorgis, E. T. (2023). Decolonising the African Union Regional Higher Education Policy: A Tentative Approach against 
Neocolonial Entanglement. In A.P. Ndofirepi, S. Vurayai and G. Erima. (Eds.) Unyoking African University Knowledge (pp. 120137). Brill.

Opinion pieces
Opinion Piece 1 
Emnet Woldegiorgis. How to create a 'new' type of university for Africa. University World News Africa Edition, 21 September 2023
The full article can be accessed at: https://www.universityworldnews.com/post.php?story=20230919180727455 Opinion Piece 2
Wagdy Sawahel. AU's 'neocolonial entanglement' undermines HE policies.  University World News Africa Edition, 26 January 2023. This article is based on a study undertaken by Prof Emnet Woldegiorgis and published in 2023 as a book chapter 'Decolonising the African Union Regional Higher Education Policy: A tentative approach against neocolonial entanglement' in the book Unyoking African University Knowledges: A pursuit of the decolonial agenda. Edited by A.P. Ndofirepi, S. Vurayai and G. Erima.
The full article can be accessed at:
https://www.universityworldnews.com/post.php?story=20230125155734473  

2022 PUBLICATIONS Journal Articles 
Published
Agbaje, O. & Sehoole, C. (2022). Expectations versus realities: insights into the transition experiences of international students at two universities in Nigeria. Journal of Student Affairs in Africa, 10(1), 47-64.
Atibuni, D. Z., Kaweesi, M. & Olema, D. K. (2022). Fluidity of teacher education and school practice during the political management of COVID-19 in Uganda. South African Review of Education, 27(1), 122-129.
Atibuni, D. Z., Manyiraho, D. & Nabitula, A. (2022). A Fourth Industrial Revolution Paradigm Shift in Teacher Education? International Journal of African Higher Education, 9(2), 1-21. 
Balogun, B. J. (2022). Resolving the conceptual problem of other minds through the identity-based model: A critique of Christopher Peacocke's "Interlocking Account". Forum Philosophicum 27(1), 27-49.
Croucher, G. & Woelert, P. (2022). Administrative transformation and managerial growth: A longitudinal analysis of changes in the non-academic workforce at Australian universities. Higher Education, 84(1), 159-175.
Govender, L. (2022). Using Critical Policy Historiography in Education Policy Analysis: A South African Case Study. Education as Change, 26, 1-20.
Cross, M. & Govender, L. (2022). Researching students' epistemic access under COVID-19. Epistemological and Methodological Challenges. Critical Studies in Teaching and Learning (CriSTaL), 10 (1), 1-22.
Hlatshwayo, M. N. (2022). The Rise of the Neoliberal University in South Africa: Some Implications for Curriculum Imagination (s). Education as Change, 26, 1-21.
Kasimba, R. & Nyoni, P. (2022). Girls' Rights to Education in Chadereka Muzarabani District, Zimbabwe: A perspective on Sustainable Development Goal Number 5. African Journal of Gender, Society & Development, 11(1), 179.
Knight, J. (2022). Understanding and Applying the Key Elements of Knowledge Diplomacy: The Role of International Higher Education, Research and Innovation in International Relations. Higher Education Forum, 19, 1-19. 
Knight, J. & Motala-Timol, S. (2022). Mauritius as a developing education hub. International Journal of Educational Development, 93, 102646.
Masutha, M. (2022). Highs, lows and turning points in marginalised transitions and experiences of noncompletion amongst pushed dropouts in South African Higher Education. Education Sciences, 12(9), 608. 
Ndlovu-Gatsheni, S. J., Seesemann, R. & Vogt-William, C. (2022). African Studies in Distress: German Scholarship on Africa and the Neglected Challenge of Decoloniality. Africa Spectrum, 57(1), 83-100.
Ndlovu, S. (2022). Barriers to research access during COVID-19: Interviewing students with disabilities in South African higher education. Critical Studies in Teaching and Learning (CriSTaL), 10(1), 39-62.
Ndlovu, S. (2022). The pedagogic domain and epistemic access in South African higher education: The challenges for students with disabilities during the COVID-19 pandemic. South African Journal of Higher Education, 36(4), 205-224.
Ndlovu, S. (2022). Mental Health Challenges for Students with Disabilities in South African Higher Education During the COVID-19 Pandemic: Resilience Crisis. Journal of Educational Studies, (2022 si1), 158-176.
Nyoni, P. & Agbaje, O. (2022). Fieldwork Dynamics in a Higher Education Setting amid the COVID-19 Pandemic. Critical Studies in Teaching and Learning (CriSTaL), 10(1), 63-77.
Nyoni, P. (2022). Pedagogies of access and success among South African university students in the extended curriculum programmes amidst COVID-19 disruptions. South African Journal of Higher Education, 36(4), 137-153. 
Ordorika, I. (2022). Student movements and politics in Latin America: a historical reconceptualization. Higher Education, 83(2), 297315.
Utanes, G. C. & Bedi, K. (2022). Critical Success Enablers of Southeast Asian Entrepreneurs in Times of Major Crises. Open Access Library Journal, 9(7), 1-25.
Vurayai, S. & Ndofirepi, A. P. (2022). 'Publish or perish': implications for novice African university scholars in the neoliberal era. African Identities, 20(2), 122-135.
Vurayai, S. (2022). COVID-19 pandemic and the narrative of the digital divide gap in universities in Sub-Saharan Africa. African Identities, 1-12.
Vurayai, S. & Manjoro, C. (2022). The Electronic Payment System and Digital Shock in Primary Education in Rural Zimbabwe. African Journal of Development Studies (formerly AFFRIKA Journal of Politics, Economics and Society), 12(3), 45-59.
Woldegiorgis, E. T. (2022). Configurations of progress and the historical trajectory of the future in African higher education. Educational Philosophy and Theory, 54(11), 1839-1853.
Woldegiorgis, E. T. (2022). Mitigating the digital divide in the South African higher education system in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic. Perspectives in Education, 40(3), 197-211.
Woldegiorgis, E. T. & Amutuhaire, T. (2022). Resilience in the face of a global pandemic: Dilemmas of equity and inclusion in Ugandan Higher Education. Journal of Educational Studies, 2022(si1), 122-140.

Book chapters 
Atibuni, D. Z. (2022). Imparting Academic Work Ethic in Undergraduate Students through Religiosity. In N.T. Assié-Lumumba, M. Cross, K. Bedi & S. Ekanayake (Eds.) Comparative Education for Global Citizenship, Peace and Shared Living through uBuntu (pp. 169-180). Brill.
Erima, G. (2022). Scholarly Publications and the Peer-Review Process: Focusing on Decoloniality. In A.P. Ndofirepi, F. Maringe, S. Vurayai and G. Erima (Eds.) Decolonising African University Knowledge's, Volume 2 (pp. 135-147). Routledge.
Govender, L. (2022). Teacher Unions and the State's Management of the COVID-19 Pandemic in the Provision of Basic Education in South Africa. In E.T. Woldegiorgis, and P. Jonck (Eds.) Higher Education in the Face of a Global Pandemic (pp. 28-50). Brill.
Hlatshwayo, M.N. (2022). Decolonizing the university: Some preliminary notes on recontextualizing (decolonial) knowledge in the time of transformation In M. N. Hlatshwayo, H. Adendorff, M.A. Blackie, A. Fataar and P. Maluleka (Eds.) Decolonising Knowledge and Knowers: Struggles for University Transformation in South Africa (pp 47-64). Routledge.
Hlatshwayo, M.N. (2022). Introducing 'decolonising knowledge and knowers'. In M.N. Hlatshwayo, H. Adendorff, M.A. Blackie, A. Fataar, & P. Maluleka (Eds.) Decolonising Knowledge and Knowers: Struggles for University Transformation in South Africa (pp 1-11). Routledge.
Oketcho, E. J. & Atibuni, D. Z. (2022). COVID-19 Pandemic Management Strategies and Implementation of Educational Programmes in Tororo District, Uganda. In J. Keengwe (Ed.) Handbook of Research on Social Justice and Equity in Education (pp. 278-295). IGI Global. 
Ndlovu, S. (2022). Improving Processes, Practices and Structures in South African Higher Education: Voices of Students with Disabilities. In A.P Ndofirepi, F. Maringe, S. Vurayai, and G. Erima (Eds.) Decolonising African University Knowledge's, Volume 1 (pp. 22-38). Routledge.
Ndlovu, S. (2022). Inclusion of students with disabilities in UK: Lessons for South Africa. In N.T Assié-Lumumba, M. Cross, K. Bedi and S. Ekanayake (Eds.) Comparative Education for Global Citizenship, Peace and Harmony through Ubuntu, (pp.181-200). Brill Publishers.
Ndofirepi, A. P. (2022). Questioning the Neoliberal Agenda: What is to Know in the African University? In A.P. Ndofirepi, F. Maringe, S. Vurayai, and G. Erima (Eds.) Decolonising African University Knowledge's, Volume 2 (pp. 1-10). Routledge.
Ndofirepi, A. P. & Gwaravanda, E. T. (2022). Can/Should African Universities be World-Class? A Critical Purview. In A.P Ndofirepi, F. Maringe, S. Vurayai and G. Erima (Eds.) Decolonising African University Knowledge's, Volume 2 (pp. 11-31). Routledge.
Ndofirepi, A. P. (2022). The African University in the Neoliberal Era: In Pursuit of Socially-Just Knowledge's in the 21st Century. In A.P. Ndofirepi, F. Maringe, S. Vurayai, and G. Erima (Eds.) Decolonising African University Knowledge's, Volume 2 (pp. 32-50). Routledge.
Ndofirepi, A. P., Vurayai, S. & Erima, G. (2022). Commodification of Knowledge in the African University: Prospects for Market-Led Higher Education. In A.P. Ndofirepi, F. Maringe, S. Vurayai and G. Erima (Eds.) Decolonising African University Knowledge's, Volume 2 (pp. 70-83). Routledge.
Ndofirepi, A. P. (2022). The Hegemonic Neoliberal Knowledge's in the African University: Which Way Now and Then? In A.P. Ndofirepi, F. Maringe, S. Vurayai and G. Erima (Eds.) Decolonising African University Knowledge's, Volume 2 (pp. 148-156). Routledge.
Ndofirepi, A. P. (2022). Gender, Disability and Rurality: Decoding the Themes in the African University Milieu. In A.P. Ndofirepi, F. Maringe, S. Vurayai and G. Erima (Eds.) Decolonising African University Knowledge's, Volume 1 (pp. 1-7). Routledge.  
Ndofirepi, E., & Cross, M. (2022). Beyond Classroom Pedagogies: Embracing Student-Driven Activities in Students' Social and Intellectual Development in South African Higher Education. In N.T Assié-Lumumba, M. Cross, K. Bedi and S. Ekanayake (Eds.) Comparative Education for Global Citizenship, Peace and Shared Living through Ubuntu (pp. 76-100). Brill.
Ndofirepi, A. P., & Gwaravanda, E. T. (2022). Can/Should African Universities be World-Class? A Critical Purview. In A.P. Ndofirepi, F. Maringe, S. Vurayai and G. Erima (Eds.) Decolonising African University Knowledge's, Volume 2 (pp. 11-31). Routledge.
Ndofirepi, A. P. (2022). Gender, Disability, Rurality, and Social Injustice in the African University: Opportunities Going Forward. In A.P. Ndofirepi, F. Maringe, S. Vurayai and G. Erima (Eds.) Decolonising African University Knowledges, Volume 1 (pp. 126-131). Routledge.
Ndofirepi, A. P. (2022). The African University in the Neoliberal Era: In Pursuit of Socially-Just Knowledge's in the 21st Century. In A.P. Ndofirepi, F. Maringe, S. Vurayai and G. Erima (Eds.) Decolonising African University Knowledge's, Volume 2 (pp. 32-50). Routledge.
Ndofirepi, A. P., Vurayai, S., & Erima, G. (2022). Commodification of Knowledge in the African University: Prospects for Market-Led Higher Education. In A.P. Ndofirepi, F. Maringe, S. Vurayai and G. Erima (Eds.) Decolonising African University Knowledge's, Volume 2 (pp. 70-83). Routledge.
Ndofirepi, A. P. (2022). The Hegemonic Neoliberal Knowledge's in the African University: Which Way Now and Then? In A.P. 
Ndofirepi, F. Maringe, S. Vurayai and G. Erima (Eds.) Decolonising African University Knowledge's, Volume 2 (pp. 148-156). Routledge.
Nyoni, P. & Agbaje, O. (2022). Ubuntu Philosophy and the Gender Crisis within South Africa's Higher Education Sector. In N.T. AssiéLumumba, M. Cross, K. Bedi and S. Ekanayake (Eds.) Comparative Education for Global Citizenship, Peace and Shared Living through Ubuntu (pp. 136-152). Brill.
Nyoni, P. & Ngqila, K. H. (2022). South Africa's University Teaching and Learning Dynamics amid a COVID-19 Pandemic. In E.T. Woldegiorgis and P. Jonck (Eds.) Higher Education in the Face of a Global Pandemic (pp. 177-198). Brill.
Kadenge, E. (2022). Re-imagining teacher professional development for the future South African public schooling context. In F. Maringe and O. Chiramba (Eds.) The 4IR and Teacher Education in South Africa (pp. 81-96). AOSIS Publishing. 
Vurayai, S. (2022). Knowledge democracy and feminist epistemic struggle in African universities. In A.P. Ndofirepi, F. Maringe, S. Vurayai and G. Erima (Eds.) Decolonising African University Knowledge's, Volume 1 (pp. 84-102). Routledge.
Woldegiorgis, E. T. (2022). The Challenges of Online Learning in African Higher Education: A Critical Reflection on the Digital Divide Associated with the COVID-19 Pandemic. In E.T. Woldegiorgis and P. Jonck (Eds.) Higher Education in the Face of a Global Pandemic (pp. 11-27). Brill.
Woldegiorgis, E. T. (2022). 'Responses and Mechanisms for Mitigating the Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic on East African Higher Education', In E. T. Woldegiorgis and P. Jonck (Eds.) Higher Education in the Face of a Global Pandemic (pp. 120-138). Brill.


ALI MAZRUI CENTRE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION STUDIES 
UJ Faculty of Education www.uj.ac.za/edu
