
 
 
Global Africa: From Abolitionists to Reparationists
Author(s): Ali A. Mazrui
Source: African Studies Review, Vol. 37, No. 3 (Dec., 1994), pp. 1-18
Published by: Cambridge University Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/524900
Accessed: 03-05-2018 19:24 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://about.jstor.org/terms
Cambridge University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend
access to African Studies Review
This content downloaded from 128.97.27.20 on Thu, 03 May 2018 19:24:00 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms




























 AFRICAN STUDIES REVIEW
      The most difficult category to assess is one in which armed  gle against the villain turns out to be more advantageous to the  than to the freedom-fighter. It may be worth juxtaposing thre  different visions in this regard-the vision of the black revol  writer from Martinique, Frantz Fanon (1925-61), the vision  rather shy English poet, Oliver Goldsmith (1730-74), an
 Christian concept of the crucifixion as a form of redemption.
       Frantz (alias Omar) Fanon was convinced that anti-colonial vio lence was a healing experience for the colonial freedom fighter. "At  the level of individuals, violence is a cleansing force. It frees the na tive from his inferiority complex, from his despair and inac tion..."(Fanon 1968, 94).
       If the crucifixion of Jesus was an act of violence, and it was at the  same time an act of atonement and redemption, there are moments when  Fanon's thought has points in common with Christian doctrine. In the  words of Frantz Fanon:
 Violence is thus seen as comparable to a royal pardon ... The colo nized man finds his freedom in and through violence (Fanon 1968,
 86).
       The crucifixion was violence as a royal pardon in the ultimate  sense-redemption by the king of kings. The son of God was killed-so  that human beings might live.
      With regard to Oliver Goldsmith, he enunciated a vision of a  good man who was bitten by a mad dog. Under normal circumstances the  man would have developed rabies or hydrophobia-and experienced
 one of the most painful forms of dying in human experience.
 But the man's inoculation against rabies was his moral worth.
 His morality was his vaccination:
 That still a godly race he ran,  whene'er he went to pray.. .  The naked every day he clad,  when he put on his clothes ...
       On the other hand, the mad dog had evil appetites when it bit  the good man. The moral fiber of the man was not only a protection for  the man; it turned out to be fatal to the dog:
 The dog, to gain some private ends,  went mad and bit the man ...  The man recovered of the bite,  the dog it was that died.3
      What really happened in the anti-colonial wars in places like  Algeria, Mozambique and Angola was a remarkable reversal of who  gained from the violence. Frantz Fanon was wrong about who gained by
 10























