Reflections
Intersection of Islam and AfricaAli Mazrui: Beacon at the
Ebrahim Rasool
the most appropriate verse of the Qur'an to memorialize him: "God bears wit-On the occasion of the passing of Ali Mazrui, Rashied Omar, imam of theof knowledge, standing firm on justice. There is no God but Allah, the Exalted,Claremont Main Road Mosque in Cape Town, South Africa, invoked probablyness that there is no god but Allah, and so do the angels and those possessed
populated in the absence of understanding the implications of belief in thethe Wise" (Q. 3:18).accept its corollary, the unity of creation and the unity of humanity. There areand justice - where the world experiences a deficit. Standing for justice is themany who qualify for the description of possessing knowledge by virtue ofpoint of the triangle that is least populated, or if it is populated, it may well bequalifications obtained in institutions of learning, whether Islamic or other. Itis, however, the third angle of this triangle - the triangle of belief, knowledge,There are many who testify to belief in the unity of God, and fewer who
tellect both for identifying the sources of injustice in the world and positingtriangle, for indeed his knowledge was founded in his unflinching commit-remembered for epitomizing the completeness and perfection of this goldenunity of God or understanding the dynamism of knowledge. Mazrui will betawḥīd (unity) and this, in turn, impelled him toward utilizing his inment to theoretical and practical solutions towards justice.
The Proud AfricanBorn in Mombasa, Kenya, the son of the eminent Shaykh Al Amin Ali Mazrui,an Islamic scholar and the country's chief judge of Islamic law, the young
Cape province ( 2004-08). served as South Africa's ambassador to the United States (2010-15) and premier of the WesternEbrahim Rasool is a South African politician and African National Congres. member who
intersect. This was a source of inspiration and nourishment for him, becausehad gravitated toward Europe, the Arab branch had oriented itself towardhe was always aware that unlike the Jewish branch of the Semite family thathad deep roots not only in Islam, but also in the points where Islam and Africaand pious enough to be considered a candidate for al-Azhar University. MazruiMazrui was steeped in the knowledge and tradition of Islam, good enough
speare and found in that author's consciousness a historical continuity ofished at these critical points of intersection with Islam, with pre-eminent cen-those in thirteenth-century Timbuktu. Africa. The result of this intersection was that scholarship and learning flour-ters of learning in Fes (founded 859), Cairo's al-Azhar (founded 972), andthe further intersection - albeit coerced - with European colonialism, heHe described Africans as "the people of the day before yesterday, and thelearned the seemingly elusive art for Muslims, namely, the art of the oxy-apparently unconnected and to harmonize that which has been held to be inmoron, the use of juxtaposition, and the embrace of paradox. This ability topeople of the day after tomorrow."combine two seemingly opposite concepts, to place in the same space theperpetual contradiction, is the hallmark itself of the combination of knowl-edge and wisdom. So much knowledge in the world today, let alone the Mus-lim world, is based upon making binaries out of difference, whereas theability to combine, reconcile and harmonize must remain germane to the veryconcept of fear and ignorance, prejudice and discrimination. Who else but Mazruiwould find in with Islamophobia in In the cauldron of this intersection between Islam and Africa, and laterThis ability is expressed delightfully at times, such as the concept of,1 to denote a natural convergence of the Arab and African worlds.tawḥīdThe Merchant of Venice- unity and integration. Othello. Where others have seen only tragic heroes,2 Intriguingly, Mazrui looked at Shake-insight into anti-Semitism, juxtaposed
Afrabia
co-edited, a delicious use of juxtaposition: "Christianity and Islam are in an ecumenicallowed him to salvage from each tradition that which is positive for theAfrican world, the Muslim world, and humanity at large. In a book that heappears competitive or conflictual is at the very heart of Africa's "TripleHeritage": indigenous, Islamic, and western. This integration of thought al-Mazrui saw the fault lines of injustice. The same ability to integrate whatAfrica's Islamic Experience (2009), this idea is articulated through wards a convergent truth."relationship when they appear to accept each other as divergent paths to-3 The This ability to combine ostensible opposites and harmonize apparent contra-pensable to the extrication of meaning and wisdom from knowledge. It isdictions is more than the integrative capacity of a Tawḥīdī Mind	tawḥīdī mind, and indis-
of meaning: the often fossilized meaning of traditional orthodoxy trapped incrucial to grappling with complexity in a world gripped by contending makersinertia, the cynical (anti-)meaning fashioned by post-modernism and oftenthis complexity, realizing that orthodoxy is more victim than perpetrator, thatdispensing iconoclasm, the nihilistic meaning forced on the world by funda-nicious in its impact and must be defeated, it feeds off the inertia and cynicismpost-modernism disparages people's anchors in life and then blames them forof the latter two.behaving like the anchorless, and that while fundamentalist extremism is per-mentalist extremism, and the incoherent meaning struggling to emerge as thealternative to the preceding three. Mazrui skillfully navigated his way throughmindsets. It was in his idea of, and commitment to, justice that the seeds ofthe very troubled world in which the ummah, Africa, and humanity finds itself.this alternative could be found. Our scholarship today needs to contribute toidentifying, understanding, interpreting, and making available the seeds forMazrui certainly assisted in laying foundations for an alternative to these
him question the disappearance of the university's vice chancellor and broughtIn the post-colonial Africa of 1973, as professor of political and social sciencesat Makerere University in Kampala, Uganda, his impulse for justice made
Mazrui could easily have accepted Amin's invitation to be his Kissinger. Thisless committed people would have imposed on themselves a silence to indulgepost-colonial Africa's teething problems, or the silence of fear and conformity.him into conflict with President Idi Amin (r. 1971-79). He chose exile when he could have let sleeping dogs lie, but instead spoke about Schweitzer as aoften provocation. His provocation was in the realm of thought. was the quintessential Mazrui: He understood that the harbinger of justice wasDespite occupying the Albert Schweitzer Chair at Binghamton University,4 referring to the medical missionary in pre-independence
"benevolent racist,"Gabon calling Africans "primitives" and "savages" and treating them in segregated hospitals. Even in this critique, he could not resist paradox, sayingto India. In contrast, he spent many years in Africa without studying Africanthat: "Schweitzer made a considerable study of Indian thought without going5 Then why did he accept the Albert Schweitzer Chair? "Partly," he thought."
dilemma when he was awarded the Nobel Prize for Peace. The philosopheranswered, "in the conviction that Albert Schweitzer must have had a similar of Reverence for Life (Albert Schweizter, 1875-1965) was receiving a prizenamed after the inventor of Dynamite (Alfred Bernhard Nobel, 1873-1916)!"6
Lessons from South AfricaI encountered Ali Mazrui for the first time in 1990. By that time Nelson Man-dela had been released from prison after 27 years, other political prisoners werebeing freed, the exiles were returning, and tentative processes toward negoti-freedom. Besides being in the leadership of the liberation movement, I wasations were commencing. Non-white South Africans could at last dream of
Peace Lecture. That year we invited Mazrui to deliver that lecture as thealso the national coordinator of the interfaith movement, the World Conferenceon Religion and Peace, whose annual flagship event was the Desmond Tutu and timed to influence the values and character of the new South Africa ofkeynote address to the first National Interfaith Conference, which was designed that the academic and cultural boycott of South Africa had not been officiallylifted. We convinced him, with letters from the African National Congress andwhich we were all dreaming. He initially refused to attend, because he believedArchbishop Desmond Tutu, that he would be most welcome.Mazrui to be part of the team of midwives who would give birth to a free,In retrospect, asking him to come was our own act of irony. We wanted
tem as a whole." We all know, of course, that after negotiating the apartheidLos Angeles Timesstructure," giving Africa enormous leverage in global politics. He told non-racial, united, and human rights-oriented South Africa. We had allwatched the compelling television series "The Africans." In the last episode,he had categorized the struggle in South Africa as the "final racial conflict" inwhich the defeat of the whites would allow black South Africans, and therebyAfrica as a continent, to gain control of "the most advanced nuclear infra-: "I want black Africa to have the bomb to frighten the sysThe-
litical leadership, Mazrui gave enormous momentum to the coherence of a fu-put the enriched uranium to peaceful use.regime out of political power, one of the first decisions Mandela made as pres-ident was to order the dismantling of South Africa's nuclear arsenal and toAt this moment of promise, preceding Mandela's historic accession to poabout the convergence in principle of seemingly divergent parts. He legitimizedMovement: Indigenous, Islamic, and Christian Tendencies." He spoke to usture united South African nation in an address titled "Africa's Pro-Democracy to achieve our goals. He appeared happy to be disproved regarding his fear ofheritance of the South African complexity, the best in our variety of tendenciesour own thoughts about fashioning, from the conflictual and contradictory ina final racial conflagration in South Africa. But it was his expectation that thefall of apartheid would usher in Africa's second liberation struggle. Whereasrule, the second one that could now commence was a struggle for social democ-the first liberation struggle was the struggle for independence from colonial
racy and social justice. in this struggle, as they had during the anti-apartheid struggle, so as to underpinthe second liberation struggle with the same ethical and moral underpinningsfor Africa to transcend its painful past. He believed that Africa was truly poisedto provide leadership in the world. Referring to Leopold Senghor, Catholicpoet and the first democratically elected president of Senegal, he said: "Onlyin Africa can you find a Muslim country accepting a Christian as a head ofstate, not for one or two terms, but for 20 years [1960-80] without riots on thestreets or objections about being dominated by an 'alien' religion."In the world in which we live, and in a pre-election United States,He exhorted all religious communities to continue their active involvement7
cepting of a Muslim leader - or even of Muslim citizens - resonates. But whatMazrui's challenge to western democracies on that occasion to become as ac-
should also resonate with Muslims, especially those who find themselves inminority situations, is his assessment of the Muslims' integration in the Southfound this to be almost as important as the end of apartheid. He said: "In theAfrican struggles against colonialism, slavery, segregation, and apartheid. He1990tiracial democratic elections, but also the 300th anniversary of the arrival ofIslam in the country - a minority religion which has proven more historicallyresilient than anyone expected."The example of Senegal and the resilience of the South African Muslims, the RSA [Republic of South Africa] celebrated not only its first mul8 	-
jority, to build an inclusive democracy and to construct a nation that is atminority, together with the commitment of the South African Christian mabecome ecumenical, that conflict and competition between Islam and Chris-and evangelists shift the emphasis from "saving souls to saving lives," theretianity could be transformed into cooperation, and that where missionariesonce diverse and united offered Mazrui proof of his thesis that Africa could service-oriented religion for the twenty-first century. This ecumenism wasis the hope of a Christo-Islamic ecumenism and the consequent rise of a ereignty" where Africans will take charge of the future, where Africa willa central to one of Mazrui's principal intellectual themes: the achievement ofPax Africana, the great African peace based on his notion of "racial sovbe freed of the influence of the colonial past, and African empowermentcould be built. would entrepreneurship and human development. This was counter-instinctiveAnti-Colonial, Non-ConformistNo one could doubt that Mazrui was anti-colonial to the very fiber of his being.When his documentary series "The Africans" was ready for broadcast, one ofment of Mazrui's anti-colonial thought is to miss his true courage. It requiredthe main sponsors, the National Endowment for the Humanities, insisted thatenormous courage in post-colonial Africa for an intellectual from Africa to re-its name be removed from the credits. Its then-chairperson, Lynne V. Cheney,fuse to conform to the prevailing dogma and received wisdom. It was a timecriticized the series as a "one man soapbox" permeated by "the idea that thewhen few political leaders and intellectuals could see beyond the damage ofWest is to blame for all of Africa's problems."western colonialism and capitalism, beyond the wanton extraction of mineralsand brutal enslavement of people. It was a time when few political leaders andintellectuals in Africa dared to critique Africa's experimentation with socialism,Marxism, and communism. It was a time when the belief was pervasive thatthere was nothing to be reprieved from western capitalist democracies.African liberalism, thereby going against a rejectionist tide. He understood thatthe capitalist West had not lived up to its liberal or capitalist ideals and believedthat the perversion of both had effectively led to a global apartheid, with a partof the world excluded from economic development and overlooked for dem-ocratic rights. The baby, however, should be saved from the bathwater. Liberalideals such as democracy, human rights, freedom, the rule of law, equality andthe separation of powers would find fertile ground on the African continent, asThe intellectual courage of Mazrui allowed him to consider the idea of9 However, to accept this assess-
winner in literature, Wole Soyinka, suggested in 1986 that Mazrui had beenin post-colonial Africa, to the extent that the Nigerian author and Nobel Prize and the market returned with too great a vengeance; and the peoples of EasternEurope, the Balkans, Africa, and Asia all yearned for the very things about"brainwashed." By 1989 the world had been turned on its head: the Berlin Wallfell and the Soviet Union collapsed; communism proved an unworkable systemwhich Mazrui had been speaking and writing.
and prescriptions for the Muslim community. Just like in Africa, he did not seeUndoing Muslim BinariesIn the works of Ali Mazrui, we see the same courage displayed in his analysis rights, Muslim nations with non-Muslim leaders, the Muslim world and mod-an incompatibility between the Shariah and democracy, Islam and women's ernization, and Muslim life and liberal ideals. But, as in all aspects of histhought, Mazrui brought complexity and nuance to his thinking. This allowedhim to distinguish between theological Islam - its system of rules, restrictions,and doctrines - and historical Islam - the way Muslims have lived their lives:
••••	on women in public life and leadership positions, whereas entire Mus-Many Muslim scholars would hold, for example, a theological restrictionlim-majority nations like Indonesia, Turkey, Bangladesh, and Pakistanhave preceded even advanced democracies in the election of women aspresidents or prime ministers. Mazrui refused to conflate liberal Islam with moderate Islam: Moderateliberal Islam would not tolerate living under dictatorships and illiberal,Islam would be a faith tailor-made for assimilation into the West, whereasrepressive regimes. He distinquished between the liberalism described above and libertari-anism as an essentially individualistic and permissive ideology.nomic interests, and cultural uniformity of the West. The former, on theother hand, may include the gamut of liberal reforms, institutional design,He distinquished between modernization and westernization, where thelatter may include capitulation to the geostrategic considerations, eco-and economic development so necessary in the Muslim world.
for such radicalization:tions is precisely the cause of the proliferation of fundamentalist extremismand the radicalization of some Muslim youth. He identifies four key reasonsToday, Mazrui may well argue that the wrong side of all of these distinc-
••••	The Israeli oppression of Palestinians, given a free pass by the West; The imperial policy of the West, manifested by war and occupation; Domestic factors in the Muslim world, such as authoritarianism, eco-The humiliations after 9/11, as seen in the growth of Islamophobia; and nomic stagnation, corruption, and the absence of freedom. 
undemocratic (although one may go so far as to suggest that significant partscited the initial energy and enthusiasm evident in the Arab Spring.finally, (4) the growing opposition to extremism. He could, of course, also havethe growing advancement of women, (3) the rise in interfaith cooperation, and,using as evidence (1) the approval for democracy in that part of the world, (2)He saw, however, the Muslim world currently as being, on the one handAgainst this, Mazrui would make a case for liberalism in the Muslim world are anti-democratic), and pre-democratic on the other hand. I suspect thatfrom his identification of the pre-democratic phase, as was a country likeEgypt in 2012, the United States and the West could have learned lessonsin their infancy. As a consequence, the impediments identified by Mazrui todemocracy remain in place: royalism, particularly in the Arab world; milita-before allowing the gains of the Arab Spring to be stillborn or either strangledrized rulers, whether in uniform or not; weak or failed states; and infant, vul-nerable democracies. In typical Mazruian fashion, he impudently proceedsgrowing inequality and limited participation of ordinary Americans in theto ask the question of whether the United States is not possibly in a post-de-mocratic phase? He asks this at the hand of the repeal of freedoms and civilliberties occasioned by the "war on terror." He asks this at the hand of theeconomy. He asks this at the hand of the dysfunctionality of the political sys-tem and its domination by moneyed interest groups and the distortion ofdemocracy as a result.
"My life," he once said, "is one long debate."Provocation Precedes ThoughtBut as we have already seen, Mazrui was not without controversy, whether inhis production and defense of "The Africans," or in going against the tide inthe ideological or philosophical streams of post-colonial Africa, or in assertinga distinction between theological Islam and historical Islam. He set out to pro-voke thought as the precursor to justice, even at the risk of being controversial.But there were those who appreciated Mazrui's abrasiveness and provo-10The Washington PostAnd debate he did!	's Tom
cation, and particularly his television series. Shales wrote: "The alternative would be an innocuous, safely 'balanced' doc-sessment accorded with Mazrui's goal for his anti-colonial discourse in Theumentary on Africa that made no ripples, provoked no discourse."11 This as-
Africans. He said unapologetically: "I was invited to look at Africa as anAfrican. I wasn't trying to run for election in the US.... The last thing I wantedto do was pander to Western prejudices." lantic: Towards a Post-Racial Global Africa," he praised Barack Obama asat the University of Cape Town, titled "Barack Obama and the Black At-In one of Mazrui's last lectures delivered on South African soil in 200812 tánamo: Double Standards in Global Justice." He criticized Obama's "wartions. Courageously, to some controversially, he subsequently revised hisposition in a 2009 lecture, titled "Fighting Evil from Nuremberg to Guan-the first black American president and called it a breakthrough in race relawhether the drone has become a weapon of ethnic-specific targeted assas-sinations." He posed the question: "If the alleged terrorists against the Unitedon terror": "One question which the Obama 'war on terror' has posed isStates had been Europeans, like a Russian Communist or Austrian Nazi,answer to the problem?"would any American president have chosen targeted assassinations as an
The Intellectual LegacyMazrui has proven to be an intellectual who cannot be ignored. His voice hasbeen silenced and his pen has run dry. What we have is a legacy of thoughtand scholarship, sometimes academic and sometimes polemical, but alwaysEven in his exile from Africa, his umbilical cord was never severed. On theprovocative and worthy of debate. His aim was not to be loved - yet he was.
contrary, his commitment and advocacy for the continent - what he called "aremarkable continent" - grew proportionately to both his distance and timeAfrica had lost a great thinker who should belong to Africa's intellectual Hallof Fame. It is rare that intellectuals in the humanities, the political sciences,away from Africa. In an obituary, Amii Omara Otunu, professor of historyand international human rights at the University of Connecticut, said thattestation, that would easily qualify them for such an award. Mazrui wouldand the social sciences gather the kind of consensus, or the absence of con-
pre-eminent thinkers and fighters for justice, freedom, and equality in the world:With his objective of justice, the abrasiveness and provocation of his thought,and his methodology of juxtaposition and paradox, Mazrui was not designedargue that this is the antithesis of the task of intellectuals in these spheres.for consensus or platitudes.For him it was sufficient that he occupied academic seats named for the
dent of the ANC and Nobel Peace Laureate; the Chancellor of the Jomo Keny-the Albert Luthuli Professor at Jos University in Nigeria, named for the Presi-
Guyana, named for the theorist of Underdevelopment; and the Ibn Khaldunatta University in Kenya, named for intellectual, freedom fighter, and foundingpresident of independent Kenya; Walter Rodney Professor at the University ofnamed for the pre-eminent pre-modern Muslim scholar of history and sociol-Professor at the School of Islamic and Social Studies in Leesburg, Virginia,
Thought conferred on him its Distinguished Scholar Award in 2011 and thatogy. For Mazrui, it would be sufficient that the International Institute of Islamic and irony that characterized his work, Mazrui may even find affirmation in thetoday it again gathers us to memorialize his scholarship. True to the paradox discomfort his work caused in the capitals of the West.
zania, and the United States, appropriately captures the importance of this in-continent that specializes in giving the world some of its best... Ali ran to histellectual giant who, for decades, was a beacon at the intersection of Islamand Africa: "We should think of Ali Mazrui as a long-distance runner from alast breath: the ink kept flowing and the corpus kept growing, and the voicetual who defined the terms of political debate for his generation!"was as booming as ever. Full of zest and fearless... Ali was a public intellec-Mahmood Mamdani, a colleague who taught with him in Uganda, Tan-May Ali Mazrui's work continue to inspire and provoke, elicit debate and13
cause consternation, all the while moving Africa to justice and pointing theMuslim world to its destiny of freedom!
Endnotes
1.	The Azanian Sea, An Online Journal of Africa and the Indian Ocean WorldAli Mazrui, "Afrabia: Is it a mere intellectual fascination or can it be realized?"uary 27, 2010.	, Jan-
2.3.4.	The quotation is from Dr. Mazrui's narration of "The Africans" produced forAli Mazrui et al., the BBC.speeches in 2012.Nobel Laureate," published online January 31, 2012: https://www.facebook.com/pages/Professor-Ali-Mazrui/28889396430. The note served as a basis forAli Mazrui, "What is a Benevolent Racist?: The Case of Albert Schweitzer,(New Delhi: Sterling Publishers, 2009), Africa's Islamic Experiences: History, Culture, and Politics3.
7.6.5.12.8.9.10.11.	generation," Ali Mazrui, "Africa's Pro-Democracy Movement: Indigenous, Islamic andIbid. Ibid.Christian Tendencies," keynote address delivered at the 6th Annual DesmondMahmood Mamdani, "Ali Mazrui defined the terms of political debate for hisIbid.Mazrui, Tutu Peace Lecture, National Interfaith Conference on Religion and State Re-lations, Johannesburg, South Africa.Matt Schudel, "Ali A. Mazrui, controversial scholar of African politics and cul-ture, dies at 81," Douglas Martin, "Ali Mazrui, Scholar of Africa Who Divided U.S. Audiences,Africa's Islamic ExperiencesThe New York TimesDaily MonitorThe Washington Post, 15 October 2014., 20 October 2014., 3., 21 October 2014.The Washington Post, 7 October 1986.
Dies at 81," Tom Shales, "The World of the Africans," 
13.
2	The American Journal of Islamic Social Sciences 33:3

	Rasool: Ali Mazrui: Beacon at the Intersection of Islam and Africa	3



