Ali A. Ylazrui
2104 Pauline Blvd. , No. 307
                                                          Ann          Michigan 48103
U.S.A.
E'...e of 1989
FAZRIJI 
To Friends and Relatives :
Dear all:
                             The Glory and the Sadness     
      Here is the Mazrui Navsletter again!       friends have been       to debate whether     newsletters will help or hinder     future biographer! SO)IE people write a daily diary; I write an annual naqsletter. Vtlich is the more revealing of the author? A daily recording of experiences or an armual distillation of inpressions? Of course both are forms of conceit and both are rooted in the sin of pride what
John Milton called "that last infirmity of the noble mind. "
      In sorre ways 1988 was the rrnst painful year since t-v•n of children lost their eyesight and their parents broke-up, But 1988 was also a year of net*A1 professional recognition and a widening intellectual constituency in the vorld. ffhe anguish was personal and familial; the recognition was in the public dojnain. ffhe glory and the sadness intertwined.
      Since the festive season is upon us, let me begin with some items of family joy. My eldest son, Jannl, graduated handsoæly from Harvard with a nester l s degree in public policy. Brenda Kiberu graduated with a æster!s degree in business administration from Wayne State University, Detroit. My middle son, Al 'Amin, bought and drove his       car at last (albeit a used car) . Kim, my youngest    ceased to be a teenager - hitting Big-Tænty in November 1988! Al r Amin becan•e a full adult hitting twenty-one in Ph.rch. And Maureen Kiberu succeeded her sister as the boss in  humble abode in Ann Arbor. (Brenda Kiberu has nc%a,' taken a job in Detroit and lives there, but she visits us from time to time. )
      My own happy nev,E includes receiving the University of Michigan's highest academic recognition - the Distinguished Faculty Achievement Award. The award was made by President Duderstadt of the University at a nEjor official cereny)ny which included the President's own Inaugural Address about "The State of the University. It was a proud monent for By coincidence 1988 vvas the 25th anniversary of the start of my academic career as a lecturer at Makerere University in Uganda way back in 1963. ffherefore the Michigan Award was in a sense a Silver Jubilee celebration of the launching of nry academic career. I am greatly indebted to all those who wrote strongly to The University of Michigan in support of my being given the award. I am also grateful to my Michigan students for their support, especially Dale Tatum for leading the student initiative in support of nomination. Mary Breijak and Lili Kivisto vere martyrs in putting together the nzssive doc-unentation needed. It was indeed a moænt of glory for IIE.
      But 1988 was also the year when      sister Biasha (Aisha) died. She was the only one of my siblings close enough to been playmate v•hen    v•ære little.
All my other siblings vere either too old or too young to have been playmates. was the youngest of nry' mther's children but not the youngest of father! s. We all had only one father; but had different mthers. father was polygamus, but mther hew only one Iran.
       last conversation with Aisha was on the telephone. I was in Arm Arbor and she was dying in hnbasa. She passed away days later. All our ganes together as children canE back to in a flood of nostalgia. I broke dom-l several tinps and wept. She was not the first of parents' children to die. But she was the first to die in nV lifetiflE. will be next? I have iA.æpt in response to that hypothetical question also! May her soul celebrate in peace as she joins our parents . Amen.
      A very different agony for ne in 1988 was Brenda  departure from our hone in Ann Arbor, She conpleted her education. That was a happy conclusion, But she was also about to begin her career in the job market . That vras a mixed blessing. It æant her leaving our hone. There vere also other reasons she had to .1eave hone. I understood the necessity for the mpture. Indeed, I encouraged her departure. But it was very painful all the sanE .
  Fortl.mately, her sister, &ureen, decided to stay and look after ne. And since the two sisters are close friends, the links betveen Brenda's hone in Detroit and ot-ü' hone in Ann Arbor have rennined strong. The tyco sisters speak on the phone every day of the veek, and visit each other at least once a week. And vhenever I out of town or out of the country, &ureen spends sone of the nights at her sister's
apartænt .
      In addition to Aisha's death and Brenda's departure, I experienced a political agony in 1988. This concerned the Incertainty about my political status in my own country, Kenya. Periodically there are rumurs that I am in disfavour with my governnent . In 1987 there vere even ruliDurs that I muld be detained if I arrived in Kenya. But President Daniel arap himself gave a categorical assurance in 1987 that there was no substance to the runn.us. I vent to Kenya OaJice in 1987, and nothing untoward happened .
But something I-musual happened in March 1988. It took place in Harare
Zimbab*.æ. I was giving a keynote address at a conference on the children of
Southern Africa. Tie meeting ves sponsored by the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and Mrs, Robert Mugabe, the First Lady of Zijnbabæ. Also at the neeting was Ngugi wa Thiong*o, the Kenyan novelist and dissident. Ngugi and I had attended other international conferences together before, and had even been photographed together. Indeed, when Ngugi was detained in Kenyatta's era, I took part in a denDnstration outside the Kenyan High Cormission (i.e. , the Kenyan Embassy) in London. And yet until March 1988 the Kenyan authorities had distinguished   style of public criticism of the Kenyan governnent (which focusses on policies and actions) from Ngugi 's æthod of public dissent (which focusses on the entire system) . The Kenyan authorities until March 1988 also distinguished bet-veen criticism by an individual citizen (like myself) and the opposition of an organized political movement (like Ngugi 's) .
      But in Phrch 1988 the Kenyan Hi$l Comission in Harare protested to against both Ngugi 's a-id ny   participation at the meeting. The High Conmission also instructed other Kenyans at the meeting to withdraw from the conference - thus ordering the withdrawal of the "Kenyan delegation" except Ngugi and myself. Never before had the authorities taken such an overt and officially negative position against me.
      If this was B4arch 1988, and I had been in Kenya less than five months before that (October 1987) , vülat had happened between the dates? In March 1988 1 had given a keynote address in Harare following President Mugabe *s speech to a conference. In October 1987 1 had given a keynote address in Nairobi before President 's speech to a similar international conference. roles in the two conferences pere almost identical . And yet role in Harare provoked an official protest from the Kenyan authoritj.es; role in Nairobi received full official legitin•acy, VQ-xat had happened in those five months to strip me of official acceptabili ty?
      I subsequently wrote to the Kenyan authorities seeking clarification. I never got an official explanation for what happened in Harare. But I have   got an unofficial reassurance through the informal net-vork that the Harare incident was a " I am relieved by this na.qs. Vhile I am indeed a critic of many of governrent 's actions and policies, and have written to the President himself in protest from tine to tine, I do not see myself as an enenry' of Irw    governn•ent. con•mitnent is to mral reform rather than to political overthrosq.
      In October I went to Uganda only for the second tine since I resigned from &kerere. You will never guess the topic of my public lecture in Kampala - *'Banking and Money" ! My host was the Central Bank of Uganda. The governor of the Bank is old friend a-Id forrper student, Suleiman Kiggundu. I was invited to give the first Joseph Mubiru Annual Dkmorial Lecture, naved after the first governor of the Bank. Joseph Mubiru was murdered, apparently on Idi Amin's orders, in the 1970s. In the early 1960s I did       Joseph Mubiru  were both students in N3N York City. We got to       each other at International House on Riverside Drive. His subsequent tragic fate (disappearance, probably torture and then murder) wounded us all spiritually.
      
 lecture in Mubiru's honour in 1988 was attended by one of the largest audiences I have ever had. The lecture took place at the International Conference Center in Kampala, the largest such hall in the country. The conference hall was filled to capacity - with outside still struggling to cone in. I was deeply nn.zed by the interest I still aroused in Uganda. was a prodigal son coming back hone. I was humbled by this expression of enthusiasm. I a legend in Uganda? I certainly felt as if I ære on that eve of independence day in Kampala in 1988. God bless Uganda. Anen.
      President Yoveri Museveni was nnst gracious the previous night 9hen I went to State House in Entebbe to have supper with him and the First Lady. I had a very stimulating conversation with the Musevenis on a wide range of issues, from agriculture in Uganda to my theory of the "winter gap" as a partial apla.nation for technological underdevelopnent in tropical Africa (see chapter eleven in book The Africans: A Triple Heritage) . On the basis of   television series, President

Museveni observed I had "moved to the left" ideologically since my old Plakerere days. I countered by jokingly suggesting that he had himself 'tilDved to the right" as a result of holding state responsibilities! We teased each other on ideology.
      The next night I had dinner with Nalongo Edith Kiberut Brenda's and &ureen's mother. That was indeed one of the highlights of      visit to Uganda. Nalongo (the title neans "mother of twins") cooked a wide range of terrific dishes for Ire . I fully indulged myself . I loved that special family evening. The conversation was in Kisvahili, Luganda and English.
      third major dinner in Uganda was Makerere-related. It was hosted by Governor Kiggundu and his wife Remi at their home. &kerere friends present at the dinner included Vice-CYEnce1Jor George Kirya and Head of the Political Science depart11Ent Apolo Nsibambi. An even older friend of mine, Abu &yanja    is Deputy Prine Minister, also graced the occasion, acconpanied by his charming new
wife. Issa Lukwago, a forner student of mine from     old &kerere days, had taken charge as guide and local planner since I arrived in the country. As my guide he was assisted by Rveyema•rn.l Reikiza. Issa and his wife ære also at the dinner hosted by Suleiman and Remi that night. It was mnderful to catch up with Makerere gossip before visit to the canpus the following n•nrning.
      But what is a former British colony without sone afternoon tea? I had tea with Ugandan royalty -       old mzee, Prince Badn.l Kakungulu, uncle of the late Kabaka. There ære other people in the Prince's Court. Prince Bad-ru and I indulged in a lot of nostalgia about the old days. He hew a -lot of relatives ( sorp of them dead) in the old part of Mombassa.
      In November 1988 1 gave the fourth Manzur Qadir Memrial Lecture in Lahore, Pakistan. Manzur Qadir wras a distinguished jurist, internationalist, and advocate of civil rights. My cmn lecture was on "The Nuclear Option in the Third V%brld•.
Sorre African and Islamic Perspectives. Previous lecturers in the series included Michael Manley, the former Prine Minister of Jarnaica, and Nadia Hi jab, the dist inguished Palestinian intellectual .
      I also gave a lecture in Islanxabad on the subject of "Africa, Islam and the West: A Confluence of Cultures. The lecture in the capital city was sponsored by the Institute of Strategic Studies in Islanabad and by the Third World Foundation. Both lectures included a discussion of women as political leaders - vü)ich v•vas very topical in Pakistan so soon after Benazir Bhutto t s party aperged as the largest party after the first nultiparty elections in the country in eleven years. Ms.
Bhutto became the first vonnn prinee minister of a Muslim country.
      Before going to Pakistan I had considered the possibility of seeking an interview with Benazir Bhutto - perhaps even arranging to have the interview f i Ired for one of the netvorks in the United States. But do you   who  host for the Manzur Qadir Lecture in Lahore was? I jaz Husain Batalvi, the Iran who prosecuted Prime Minister Zulfikat' Ali Bhutto on a murder charge in 1977/8. 
case for the prosecution was successful . The forn•er Prine Minister was sentenced to death by the courts. General Zia, the military ruler had  Bhutto, refused to comnmte the sentence. Zulfikar Ali Bhutto was executed. Then in 1988 his daughter was elected to lead the governi1Ent of the country. I could hardly ask the prosecutor of her late father to help get an interviev•q with Ms. Bhutto.
      Mind you, I jaz Batalvi is an inpeccable professional jurist. His role in the prosecution of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto before the High Court of Lahore was strictly in the line of legal duty, not political vendetta. Afterall, Bhutto was charged with the crime of murdering a particular individual . He was not tried for such vague political offenses as "endangering national security" or "conspiracy". I jaz Batalvi presented the prosecution's case of homicide - and won.  the judges' verdict was justified or not is another matter .
      I was in Islarnabad I did see Zulfikar Bhutto's widaq, Begum Nusrat Bhutto (Benazir's mother) , But that was a casual encounter at the hotel vhere Vere both staying. Tiere was no interview of Begum Nusrat Bhutto by Mazrui, alas! 
(Incidentally the Begum and her daughter are joint Chairpersons of the Pakistan People's Party) .
      Have you ever been in a section of an aeroplane vhen you were the only passenger? That is what happened to me on my way back from Pakistan. The portions of the journey from Karachi to London straightforvard. It was the final segnent from London to Detroit vhich really elevated to a splendid isolation. I was the only passenger in first class. This was the first tine it had happened to me on an international flight .
I was assigned a stewardess exclusively to myself . It was up to ne to say when
I was ready for dinner. meoretically, I could even decide whether the film in
first class should be shown or not. (Logistically it was less easy, and so I had to put up with an aging Burt Lancaster on the screen) . Again theoretically I had tm first class lavatories entirely to nyself - but a fevy' intruders from the business class kept on spoiling ny mnopoly - a kind of Imofficial anti-Trust law (or did I IEan anti-Trust "Loa"?) 
      Although nv airline was Pan-Aærican, flight attendant r,qas GernEn. mat is mre, she knew much about Mombasa, Mal indi and Lamu, all of t*lich she had visited.  sense of isolation in flight vqas mitigated by her readiness to combine formal service with infonnative conversation. Bless her .
      My æmbership of Pan-Anerjcan frequent travel Jers scheme has benefited me handsoæly. By 1987 1 had accurrulated so much mileage that three sons and myself received free roundtrip air tickets from Michigan to Mombasa and back. This year flew to Jamal Mazrui i s graduation at Harvard mainly on the free tickets I had earned from Northvqest Airlines. The system     on the basis of number of miles accumalated. I travel so many thousands of miles every year that these free family tickets are among       reel I-earned fringe benefits!
      Jamal i s Harvard degree was a Master! s in Public Policy studies. We vere all so proud of him. After graduation Jamal took a job involving computers in a telephone company in Massachusetts . His salary as a beginner was alniost half present salary at The University of Michigan and more than his mother's salary as a language teacher with more than 25 years experience. Molly and I should have gone into the computer business - and averted this humiliation by our son in his first job ever ! Can you imagine? I where to go no.N when I cannot rake ends meet (a constant crisis in life! ) . 
      Does this nean that Jamal has finished his education? He has not made up his mind about that yet. He ney go back to Harvard or sone other university for a doctorate. Or he may decide he has had enough as a student - and just continue as a PEI I-paid computer expert !
      Kim is getting to be more deeply interested in philosophy as preparation for legal studies. His ambition is to go to law school after his bachelor i s degree here at Michigan. I have reminded him often enough that law is part of his family! s tradition. But Kim will be the first Mazrui to practice Western law instead of Islamic law. Kim's grandfather ( i.e. , father) was, after all, the Chief Kadhi or Chief Judge of Appeal under Islamic Law for the whole of Kenya during the colonial period.
      Al : Amin, my middle son, does not seem to have liede up his mind yet about his future career. His latest interest is business; but IEfore that it was psychology. At his age there is still room for trial and error, for thinking out different possibilj.ties in one's life. At the age of 21 Al r Amin is novv a full adult. But at the age of 21 his father had not even gone to college yet. I 22 %hen I left Mombasa for Britain at last. So Al 'Amin still has tire to rnake up his mind!
Psychology remains one of his favourites .
      In the spring of 1988 Ohio State University honoured me again with an appointnent as Distinguished Visiting Professor . I wes more irrpressed than ever by how active on Africa the canVu.s in Columbus was. There was a conference on Africa during my stay there, another conference on Black a poetry-recital by 9,b1e Soyinka, the Nigerian Nobel Laureate, and a debate between myself and Chester
Crocker, U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs tmder the Reagan
Administration. In addition I gave a public lecture on a separate day on "ffhe AIDS
Epidemic and World Order: An African Perspective. I ' During my stay I lived with Isaac and Bobbie Ybwoe. 'Ihey were wonderful and con-mitted friends. Isaac's young sister, Rita, joined us from school before I left Columbus.
      The Conmonæalth Caribbean celebrated the 150th anniversary of effective en•ua.ncipation from slavery. ffhe Republic of Guyana in South Anerica invited      to give the keynote address in the presence of the Head of State, President Desmond Hoyte. Also in attendance was General Yakubu Gomn, forær Head of State of
Nigeria. The thene of   address was "Collective &.rtyrdom in Evbdern History: From the Mandingo to the &ndelas.      I took advantage of the opportunity to request
President Hoy-te to restore to national legitimacy the na.11E of the late distinguished Guyanese historia-l and political activist, Walter Rodney, (Rodney's mst popular bole internationally is  though that is not necessarily his most invortant v•ork as a historian. )
      Walter Rodney (whom I hew when he was a lecturer at the University of Dar es Salaam) was killed in 1980 by a bonb. Members of the ruling party of Guyana rære suspected of this apparent assassination. decision to raise the issue in 1988 in the presence of the leader of the party and Head of State was therefore tricky - not least because kexmote address was being broadcast live on the radio nation-wide.  appeal for restoration to national legitinncy was greeted by a thunderous applause from a -large proportion of the imnense audience at the neeting. Fortunately the President did not shon any displeasure or enbarrassænt, but embraced warmly when I completed presentation. I was n•ost impressed - and relieved - by the  graciousness. But the rain thing is reconciliation and national consensus in Guyana itself . I do hope President Hoyte continues to give consideration to presu.nptuous but sincere advice about restoring Rodney to national legitimacy.
      General G09K)n's participation in the celebrations in Guyana was given a high profile. He was treated virtually like a Head of State. He cane to Guyana, leading a Nigerian delegation which was 50-strong (scholars, artists, dancers, actors, officials, etc.) . I believe this was the General 's first international official mission on behalf of Nigeria since he was  as the Head of State    back in 1975. I was delighted to see the General again, although    had in any case been keeping in touch over the years .
      Trinidad and Tobago also marked the 150th anniversary of eæncipation from slavery. General G5A,on and I also participated j.n the Trinidadian festivities. hit the event as celebrated in Trinidad "paled" when compared with its national visibility in Guyana. Tie Trinidadian authorities seaned so aruxious to avoid offending Indo-Trinidadians that they handled erpancipation from slavery as an "Afro-

Trinidadia.t"l'l event, instead of treating it as a national occasion. I kE1ieve the
Nigerian delegation was offended by the casual way in which their forn•ter Head of
State vqas treated. Of course, Govqon is not Head of State now. But neither is
Prince Charles or the Duke of Edinburgh. Tiere is a suspicion that the Trinidadian authorities ia.ould have treated the Prince and the Duke with soæthing closer to the dignity of a Head of State than they apparently did with the forner Head of State of Nigeria.
      But all these reservations concern the authorities of Trinidad rather than the people there. Privately individual Trinidadians shc".ed great courtesy and hospitality. I was delighted to catch up with Selwyn Ryan professionally and to neet his nevq wife. They have a beautiful,  hare, on a hill overlooking the ocean.       lunch with them was against a spectacular setting.
      Justice Pbnica Barnes was also nnst gracious in inviting ne to dinner and assembling sone distinguished Trinidadians to neet DE . Also in   was   old friend, Sir Fred Phillips, former Governor of St. Kitts. I him first in the 1960s vhen he was a roving diplon•at, who helped us in our    diplomatic training at Makerere University in Uganda with the da"ming of the era of indepez&nce. Fred and

the Carnegie  for International Peace were pillars of strength in the diplonatic training.
      In Trinidad I ret another old West Indian friend       previously vorked for the Carnegie - Reggie Dun-as. It was good to catch up with Reggie. I did æet him briefly at Jamal 's graduation from Princeton in 1986. One of Reggie's kids ves also graduating then. I believe Reggie is na,N Trinidad's Ambassador to the United States. Our best wishes to him in his nag role .
      A curious thing about visit to the Caribbean in 1988 was the degree of security protection I was provided in Guyana. Locksley Edmndson and I were accorrmodated in a special presidential guest house. That was closely guarded. But in addition I was assigned a kind of glide to acconpany phenever I left the safety of the guest house. Before long it began to appear that the guide was more like a security officer to protect than just a companion. Fortunately he was pleasant, sociable and intelligent . If he carried a veapon, it was very discreetly done .
       did Guyanese hosts feel that I needed special protection? I discussed the issue with sone friends in Guyana. One theory was that my viå*v's about Walter Rodney vere vulnerable from both the right and the left .in Guyana. Another theory was that lecture about "Islam in Africa" was sponsored by one group of Muslims in Guyana who had adversaries elsewhere in the Guyanese Muslim commnity. lecture about Islam was entirely different from 11Ein national assignrent as keynote speaker. ) According to this theory, the authorities in Guyana did not want to caught up in son-e sectarian feud. Tie third theory to explain the protection I was getting was that it was merely an extension of the security Guyana was giving to General Gomn. Until Miriam kkeba arrived, General and I were the mst visible African g..tests to the national event in Guyana. Fortunately for us, Miriam. Makeba cane late - otherwise she could I-Eve  in popular in-age both Govcv. and me! It would be helpful to hovq much security and protection Miriam Makeba received. Perhaps that vould help to aplain Guyana 's security policy tc"zard.s me as sell .
      I was in Guyana the Leader of the Opposition, Cheddi Jagan cane to see at the Presidential Guesthouse where I was staying. Later on one of the retspapers in Guyana speculated that Cheddi had con-e to persuade on behalf of his party to intercede with the Head of State, President Deamnd Hoyte, on specific matters of policy *lich the opposition was concerned about. The nevqspaper!s speculation was entirely without foundation.
      m-len he carre to see me, Cheddi was simply but graciously visiting an African visitor to his cotmtry. We had in fact first 11Et in Canada way back in 1966 when vere both speakers at a huge Toronto meeting on the theæ of "Revolution and Response. " Cheddi Jagan was already a v•orld figure by then; I vvas only just begiming to attract international attention. It was great to see Cheddi again in 1988 - so spritely, alert and very veil!
      I visited    in October 1988 under the auspices of the Soviet Institute of Political Economy and the World Order Models Project (VQ4P) . The agenda focussed on the concept of sovereignty in the enErging global civilization. It was fascinating to enter into such deliberations with Soviet scholars in the era of  and glasnost . It v.as also gratifying to be with former colleagues of the World Order Models Project .
      Gennadi Gerasiny•v, who is nc".l the foreign affairs spokesman of the Soviet Union, used to be one such colleague in   in the 1970s.     he is constantly on the television screens of the     explaining this or that aspect of Soviet foreign policy to the mrld press. We used to call him "Gene" in our old    days  thus Anericanizing his more interesting Russian naæ. It was good to see him again in tvbsca.q this last October. It was particularly impressive to watch him perform at a press conference, ansvering questions from journalists of the mrld.
      But perhaps mst interesting experience in rvbscos.9' in 1988 concerned an encounter which sent ne back in tiæ. It was in 1971 that I attended a doctoral defence in Moscow. The candidate was a young woman who had vmitten about Nigeria.
lhe defence was open to the public, and I was taken there with an interpreter of my I was impressed by the nature of the proceedings. Questions could be addressed to the candidate from the floor by any of the spectators. And the dissertation itself had been nEde available at a library prior to the defence so that the public could consult it in advance. The young scholar seared to be ansvvering the qaestions confidently - though I renember wondering why she was quoting Lenin so often    the thesis was about Nigeria.
          røhat has all this anecdote about an event in 1971 got to do with visit to Mosccm in 1988? Well, at our conference on sovereignty in 1988 1 got a message.
The æssenger asked : "Do you renember attending a doctoral defence in the Soviet
Union seventeen years ago?"   I confirmed, the nessenger told     that the 1971 Ph.D. candidate 901..11d like to neet re . I had no idea that the candidate at that tine even kna•.l       name. Admittedly, I might have been the only African in the audience at the doctoral defence. But it never occurred to     that the candidate would know my identity, let alone renember it for seventeen years aftemvards , Anyhaa, we finally arranged in 1988 to have lunch together . It was delightful . Of course       the candidate and nyself •ere rl(Y.J n•ore mature scholars. I was delighted that she too was still involved in African studies (including Nigeria) . She told that the commmity of Africanists had expanded in the USSR. Her Institute of African Studies       consisted of three hundred scholars.
          rme Head of the Institute of African Studies is Professor Anatoly Gromx'ko, the son of the Soviet President 9ho retired in 1988. The younger Gromyko and I have met at international conferences in both Europe and Africa. A colleague at the University of Michigan    is a specialist on the Soviet Union told a year ago that Anatoly Gromyko had criticized    in Pravda, apparently because I seened to treat the Soviet Union and the United States with equal suspicion as superpovers, and have accused both countries of insincerity in the politics of disarnEnent .
Tie last time I net Professor Anatoly Gronryko Y.jas at the Fifth International
Congress of African Studies held at the University of Ibadan in Nigeria in 1985.
Talking of Nigeria, I have missed it a lot lately.     appointnent with the     
University of Jos has cone to an end. It vaqas with great reluctance that I bored out of the arrangement, partly for family reasons here. But I hope to out a looser linkage with the University of Jos on sone future date if the University would still be interested.
      I am delighted to neet some Jos colleagues at conferences from tine to tine. And       old departrpental boss at Jos, Jonah Isawa Elaigwu, ænages to telephone Ire occasionally, especially when he cones to the United States on one official bEiness or another. I saw A. T. Gana and other friends at the World Congress of the International Political Science Association in Washington, D.C. ,
     In August I was in Lusaka, Zambia, to give the keynote address at the Sixth
Southern Africa Islamic Youth Conference on the there of "Africa - Our
Responsibility. " President Kenneth Kaunda officiated at the opening ceremony and was the Guest of Honour. Later on at State House the President paid Ire the supreæ corrpliænt of life - he thanked God for "giving Africa Ali Mazrui. " The tribute was televised .
      In addition to keynote address the conference organizers asked to give t-BD other lectures at the .i)MEnse Mulungushi Conference Hall . The other lectures ære similarly attended on a bjg scale. final lecture on conflicting ideologies in Africa provoked a lively debate in Zambian nev,Epapers long after I had left the country.
      I enjoyed a lot of Zambian hospitality during few days there, and was particularly looked after by Yusuf Limbada and his family. It was also great to see old educational ward, Obi Jackson Njovu. He is a soldier in the Zambian army, and v•vas recently promted. My best wishes to all Zambian friends, and to all the participants at the Islamic Youth Conference. I was delighted that series, The Africans, had YEen seen by so many people jn Southern Africa.
Zambia, Zimbabe and at least one of the South African so-called "honelands" had  the series.
      The Africans was also televised in Libya in 1988. What is mre, the con•ænta.ry in Libya was in Arabic. The 'IV series neede enough of an impact on Libya that I was specially invited officially to visit Tripoli I went there in June, and was impressed by the Libyan version of and  Many political prisoners sere released in bdarch. And Qaddafi declared an open door policy for Libyans to come and go. Many Libyans actually packed their bags and left. On the other hand, n•eny other Arabs decided to cone to Libya and take over sore of the jobs vacated. There has been a genuine relaxation in Libya - including readiness to resume diplomatic relations with neighbouring Chad.
   VOIi1e I was in Libya I also participated in a rv•orkshop on "The African Social Situation", sponsored by the African Centre for Applied Research and Training. The
Centre is under the leadership of Dr. Duri Mohamed, the forrner President of the University of Addis Ababa. It was so good to see Duri again. His Centre in Libya is under the United Nations Economic Conmission for Africa, *lose Head, Professor Adebayo Adedejj, also joined us at the mrkshop in Tripoli . I had not seen Adebayo for a while either. So Tripoli becane a nejor reunion centre this June for a old friends. In addition to the events directly connected with the mrkshop, sere entertained to a feast by the Nigerian Ambassador to Libya.
      Do you renEmber the minute-and-a-half of Qaddafi that I included in programme 9 of The Africans? 'I%at brief sequence caused a lot of controversy in the United States when the TV series was shcmn here. Indeed, that minute-and-a-half in nine hours of television was enough to have the 'IV series denounced as "pro-Qaddafi!" by the Head of U.S. National Endowment for the Humanities. Well, believe it or not, the brief sequence abou.t Qaddafi was not, repeat not shov•m in Libya! It had been deleted, On the other hand, the United States had attenpted to distort my nessage about Libya by inserting a negative picture on terrorism into my Qaddafi sequence.
conclusion are      to draw from this? That neither the United States nor Libya have gone far enough yet in either  or 
      On the other hand, the r.L"V series was honoured in 1988 by an An-erican charitable organization dedicated to Africa. The organization is called Africare. The award was in recognition of my       series! role in enhancing Aærican awareness and understanding of Africa. The ceremony took place in Washington, D.C. . A number of African ambassadors to Washington attended the event, including the new Kenyan ambassador, Hon. Denis D. Afande, and the Ugandan ambassador at the tine, Princess Elizabeth Bagaya (Nyabongo) . Later on the Princess invited       to her official residence for a private lunch. I appreciated the opportunity to catch up with her nev.zs, including fuller details about hc".7 her husband was tragically killed in a planecrash in North Africa. I was later sorry to learn about Elizabeth's disagreeænts wj th her colleagues in government in Kampala . She ceased to be Uganda s ambassador .
      In addition to the Africare Award, Tie Africans mn a number of other prizes in the course of 1988. Although the    series has done very tell in North Aærica, Africa, the Caribbean, the Arab mrld and other places, it has not done so       in continental Europe. Tie primary reason could be that European television had decided that one       series on Africa was quite enough - and they had already bought the     series called Africa, narrated by the distinguished British Africanist historian, Basil Davidson. me two series are entirely different from each other (partly because Basil and I, though friends, are tm very different observers of Africa) . This is quite apart from the distinction betæen a sympathetic outsider like Basil and a native of the continent like myself. Nevertheless, many continental European    stations seem to have decided that one series about Africa was quite enough! !
      One result is that although my      series has probably been sh%Y1 in n-ore countries of the vorld than has Basil Davidson t s series, mine has been televised in feær  countries than Basil T s. (Africa was available in the nerket earlier than The Africans, and seems to have therefore been bought sooner in Europe) .
     mrk for the World Bank has got Imre diverse. In addition to nv nembership of the World Bank i s Council of African Advisors, I have had a number of invitations to address separate  of the bank on varied aspects of the African condition. I see my role with the World Bank in terms of ny concept of counterpenetration - Africa's reverse influence on those whose decisions affect Africa! s own destiny.
      I ænt to Canada twice in 1988. First, was to Dalhousie University in Nova Scotia 9here I gave one of the three prestigious annual Killam Lectures. My ther1E was futuristic - "Independent Africa: Does It Have a Future?" I also gave a short talk at the University's annual Africa Night festivity. In addition to host Tim Shaw, I met a lot of other old friends and n•ade a few new ones. I also gave a lecture on human rights off campus - at a conference of young Black Canadians. One topic of conversation at Dalhousie was On-ari Kokole, nv young colleague at the University of Michigan. In 1988 he had at last defended his Ph.D. thesis at Dalhousie (hiversity. Everyb)dy at Dalhousie rvqas discussing what a superb defence it had been - a 11E1mrab1e occasion for all who Vere there. Felicitations, dear Kokole !
second visit to Canada was made under the auspices of the African
               Resource and Communications Centre in Toronto. Apart from making new Canadian and West Indierx friends, I met a wide variety of Africans, including forlær colleagues of the University of Jos. Particularly exciting was seeing Goretti Mugambda, who had just arrived in Canada from Jos. Vianney Bukyana - had arrived in Canada much earlier and who was also formerly of Jos - seemed to have truly settled       in Ontario at last. CAhile in Toronto I was also entertained by the African Woræn l s Association of the city.
      You will have noticed that     all the lectures I have referred to have been outside the United States. In fact, I gave a very wide range of public lectures all over the USA. But precisely because of that they are too many to enumerate. The lecture       provoked the 11Est debate was given right here at me University of Michigan, sponsored by the Palestine Solidarity Group. My topic was "Israel and South Africa: Strange Bedfellovs or Natural Allies?" My lecture was debated on this campus for 9'.eeks after that A militant pro-Israeli rightwing students! group even printed and distributed leaflets denouncing     as anti-Semetic. For an "antiSemite" I certainly nEke strange choices!   private doctor is a Jew; my private lawyer is also a Jew. Of course I did not choose them because of their ethnic origins - but the point is, I did not have to choose them at all! They have been highly valued doctor and lawyer for years. I wonder h09.r rrany pro-Israeli Jaqs have an Arab doctor or an Arab lawyer by choice?
      I have avoided invoking the statement "Sone of   best friends are .Jaqs" , but that also happens to be true! I get disgusted with people   cannot take criticism of Israel without resorting to the charge of "anti-Semitism. t '
      Friends from Africa who visited the USA in 1988, and slEnt nEny hours with ne, included    nephew* Al-Arnin Plazrui, Negussay Ayele from Addis Ababa University in Ethiopia, and Nuruddin Farah, Somalia's distinguished novelist . It was  to see them again and to catch up with their news. At the annual n-eeting of the African Studies Association of the United States I rret a lot of other friends from Africa as      including Abdulrahman Babu and Issa Shivji of Tarzania. Elsewhere in 1988 1 also met 1%Rlimu Julius K. Nyerere - but on a plane rather than on land! We were on the saæ flight from  to Addis Ababa. It was our first neeting since he retired from the Presidency of Tanzania. Bfrqalinu was very gracious on the I am sure he tenuld have been equally gracious had he hom that I had just described his entire socialist experinent as a "heroic failure" in       lecture to thousands of people at the International Conference Centre in Kampala the day before. But in       lecture I did emphasize the heroism even mre than the failure.
I stressed Mælimu's honest effort and integrity.
      Legacy Productions, Ltd. , the ambitious enterprise   have set up to prorrnte African talent in the United States, has only just started to be active. We had serious discussions about projects with such African artists as Nuruddin Farah and such leading African businessnpn as Chief Abiola. Under Legacy auspices I was also interviewed on television by the Colonbia Broadcasting System (CBS) in the USA. I also participated in a Philadelphia television project entitled "From Slaveship to Spaceship: The Black &perience. " In Detroit I took part in a television debate about a *Ectacular but f laved 'IV series, Shaka Zulu.
      With regard to this tradition of writing seasonal letters, Yash Tandon once theorized (half in jest) that my biographer would face the challenge of cut-andpaste! ! The biographer could cut and paste together paragraphs of Newsletters t juxtaposing them from year to year. Unfortunately Newsletters belong to the post-Makerere phase of my life. I v•nnder what I yould have said about Yash Tandon were both at Makerere in the 1960s? In 1988 1 was delighted to see him and Mary t and Hasu Patel and his wife, Diana, 9hen I visited Zimbabve for the UNICEF neeting. It is 901'th noting that I am nc%.q a nember of the Pan-African Cotmcil of Advisors of the United Nations! Children's Fund. Council v.zs scheduled to neet again in Zimbab4E in December 1988, but unfortunately I could not go this second t ine.
       I have a lot n•ore to report about experiences in 1988. But I mast bring this missive to an end!      was I able to do so many things in a single year? Because I had a very strong team at   home base. Professionally, The Departænt of
Political Science and the Center for Afroanerican and African Studies at Michigan Vere very supportive. Plax-ty Breijak and Judy Bau$m often vent well beyond the call of duty in their 54m spare tine to help Ire secretarially. Onpri H. Kokole is still a rrnjor presence in both my professional and my family life, Allah be praised. 
research and teaching assistants this year included Dale Tatum, Nike Adebiyi, Scott Angleæyer, and Michael Coyne. And doæstic .1ife continued to depend ovenhelmingly on the tv.n Kiberu venen. This year it was kureen first and Brenda second, with their n•other in Kampala giving strong support . deepest gratitude to all nembers of       team - mth near and far, including the temporary but enthusiastic assistants that Ohio State gas...ye     in the spring.
We wish them, and you all, a very prosEErous and happy nevi year !
Yours warmly ,
Ali A. Idazrui

