                Ole univeråit% o/      LC wan
                       en                       roamerican an              rican         u ieJ
909 MONROE • ANN ARBOR, MICHIGAN 48109, U.S.A.
TELEPHONE (313) 764-5513
January ,
Dear Friends ,
       You wrote to me a little while ago , I apologise for not responding sooner, but the last twelve months have easily been the most hectic of my entire life.
       I had both professional obligations and rather serious family problems . On the family front two of my children were threatened by blindness.     We were all kept rather busy with medical and related concerns. We are still worried about the children's problems .
       Professionally in the last twelve months I had long-standing conmitments with UNESCO, the African Studies Association of the USA (of which I was presi- dent), the British Broadcasting Corporation (of which I was the 1979 Reith Lecturer), the World Order Models Proj ect (of which I was Director of the African section) and the Center for Afroamerican and African Studies of this University (of which I was a newly appointed Director) .
       As a result of some of these commitments I crossed the Atlantic at least once every month throughout 1979, This travelling load was quite apart from the actual business I had to conduct for each of the above organizations.
       Some of you wrote to me with a specific request in mind. It may now be too late to do anything about your request. You may have made other arrangements already. If I let you down in any way, I do apologise most sinc erely •
      A few of you wrote to enquire about scholarships and fellowships in the United States .  You may already have got fixed up by now. I certainly hope so.    If you are among the lucky ones, I congratulate you heartily.  But if you still have problems, let me confess that I have been having problems too in my efforts to help aspiring students get financial sponsorship.     Funds are rather tight in the United States right now. I     sorry I cannot sound more optimistic.
2
       But some of you wrote to me about other things. If your business is still pressing, and you think I may be able to help, by all means write to me and say so I '11 see what can be done. If nothing can be done, I will see what else to sugges,t.
       Meanwhile, please forgive me for not responding sooner. Forgive me also for this standard reply. As a result of the volume of work and worry these last twelve months I am now so far behind in my correspondence that I have had to resort to this standard letter. Please be tolerant.
With best wishes for the rest of 1980 and beyond.
Yours sincerely ,
Ali A. Mazrui, D.Phil. , (Oxon)
Director, and
Professor of Political Science
AAM:vw
