                                                 Ali A. Ivhzruå
No. 307
2104 Pauline Blvd. Ann Arbor, Mich. 48103
U.S.A.
Eve of 1987
To Frierds      Relatives:
Dear Valued Ones,
A Tri le Herit e: The Finale
      Here is the Mazzui N4E1etter once again. It's been a year of pain ard pilgrimages, of fame and infamy! I will tell you all about it, but let me first wish you aryl your loved ones all the very best of the festive season. Relax for a  As for 1987, nny it be a successful ard aperience for you all. Arren.
            
Did you lanai tlzt my first job in the Western mrld vas a busconductor on a trolley bus in Huddersfield, Yorkshire? 'I'l-zt ses thirty years to the month! The BBC Vaznted to use that 1956 event for public relations in 1986. So all went to Huddersfield, posed in front of an antiquated HE , ard a lot of  taken for local naA7spapers in the North of
     Tl'Et side of tl-e event v.es artificial - a mere eercise in television the otYier    the eve-it ves a genuine pilgrinnge for me because Hu&ersfield tkEn my first job in the kstern wrld. Huddersfield ms also the place of my acadenic  in secondary education after doirg poorly in high school in P'bnbasa. At Huddersfield College I kEd my second chance - a turn-irg   in my acadanic career !
      But above all it wes in Huddersfield that I n•Et Bbl ly - the who becane my wife ard tlæ of my three sons. ves therefore a turnip- -nint in my private life as veil. It æs therefore trnt my 1986 visit to Hu&ersfield I meet blly's in the street! Nostalgia caplete! It to see Ethel so

      In spite of the visit to Huddersfield, tre pramtion of Africans" as a series in Britain - canpared to later took place in U.S. - relatively limited. Again as conpared with Anericans, tre British reacted to tlE seriæ. TYE in the United States was , if anythirg, over-reaction. But shall return to that later.
     On the other hard, I lost nv privacy in tYE streets of Lordon nm•e decisively than in An•erican streets. In the sumner in r.ørdon I got stopped so æny tiræs by enthusiastic vie"ers tret (believe it or not) I resorted to dark glasses to minimize recognition! For a brief nine     I 

film stars felt like! Black people saretiæs embraced me, or even  their cars if they spotted me through the wind097. British whites were neore restrained in their encamters! All these street encounters tnosted my mrale even when 1 9.es vearirg dark glasses !
      I wes honoured this year by Cornell University bhen it  me At-drag D. I*tlite Professor-at-large. The  is for six years. (Ardre,l D. "%iite  and first president of Comell. ) But what is a "Professor-at-Large"? Basically, it is a inn-residential professorship. I rzve becæ one of Cornel 1 i s resources - available fran time to time as public lecturer, senårzr to students, ard general consultant. The recomErütion to the Trustees from the Ardraa.7 D. intiite Camnittee for my appointment ves a tmanimous naninatia-x. I feel greatly
I look foward especially to  with Africana Stldies ard Research Center with political scientists at Cornell. Locleley Ednnndson vas a vital force in the whole schane. I am much
      Jaæl, our oldest gzZ..Eted fran Princeton - a-rd turned up in strergth at the to cheer. I fle,q in fran I.ondon for tlæ ocæsion - Phureen ard Kiberu also joined the &zruis in Princeton for tlE festivities. It vas a proud nunent for us all. Janzl then won a Kennedy scholarship to do  at the John F. Kennedy School of Government - ard Izs chosen to focus especially on p.iblic policy aspects of technology at Harvard University.
      Kim  (our ya.mgest) celebrated his eighteenth birthday in the middle of his first year as a pre-law student at The University of Michigan (his pnrlqlace!) . Al t Amin also decided to transfer fran Western
Michigan University in }Ä1anzzoo to the University of Michigan here in Ann Arbor. Al 'Amin specialize in Fortunately neither Iren has as yet decided to register in one of classes. Should I refuse to Izve than in my class? does the law of nepotism apply here? k&'be the boys have klad enot$i lectures at I-me from Dad over tlE years! kybe they think enou$l is enough! In *lich case I will spared the dilemas of nepotism in class! !
      Brada reent honE to (Zanda for the st..umer holiday. in the autum, Brerda started her program•e for a Whster*s degree in basiness Administration at iaäyne State University in Detroit. The camutirg by car is one hour each
 - particularly  when it snoaz in the evenirgs! But is bearirg vell - "Izrgirg in there"! She also nzny in the library! Forturztely her sister Whu•een I-es able to help in lookirg after me! ! (Lookirg after "&ee". ) &ureen t s skills in the kitchen I-Eve dranEtica11y inproved since her arrival from Ugarda last year, She vas spoilt a little by her in Kampala - doirg almst cookirg. N09Zdays in Michigan she en even attenpt Seahili dishes and Irdian Ocean cuisine including chapatis ard mchuzi! Can you inzgine?
      But all cookirg studies is bad in the age. Fortunately kureen is gettirg sorre excellent fran Cleary College near here, studyirg for a Bachelor's in Business Administration.
      Our little East African ccnmmåty at the Unisærsity of Jos seens to be shrinkirg. When Viarmey Bu.kyana (from Rer±) pæ..s gralted asyll.m in Canada, ard left us, his brother, Berthas Gasana, in with in my house. He turned out to as good as Sam Sebirz in looking after ælfare. Gasana for me, sent  cooked, xeroxed doctÜIEnts, dealt with the library entertained distårguisyzed visitors from abroad. I was extremely lucky. He did all these thirgs still rlEnaged to to his homeork as in science at tYE University of Jos.
      Tie Okeniyi family (Zeke ard Liz) vere the leg of my Jos domestic The third ses Goretti r•mgamWÄ, a Ugardan, alv•ays eager to cane to the rescue. Pauline Uti helped with stperb hot pepper soup!
      Zeke and Goretti also  in aåninåstrative netters at the thiversity - bit the central pillar of my entire stay at Jos ra•ained Jorxah Isaba,a Elaigvaa.i and his fanily. Through him I vas also in touch with the rest of the paer structu•e at Jos am irdeed in the larm
       last big event of the year at Uriversity of Jos in Nigeria vas the Pan-African ca•xference on Rights aryl Africa's Triple Heritage: Irdigenous, Islamic Pkstern Perspectives. " factors gave the conference a strikirg politiæ.l relevance. the full participation of General, also Doctor, Yakubu Gaen, Nigeria's leader durirg the Civil of 1967 to 1970 ornaärds mtil 1975.  by Gaen, he ves with us at almst every session of the conference as a full academic

        Go.nn's               assuned  sig-dficance from the fact tl-zt
Nigeria's current of State, President Ibrah,im B. Babargi&, graciously caæ to Jos to open conference. horn-ars 'sere conferred on Gos"nn. Tie of State addressed him as "General - thus restoring the rank he lost Govan yes in disgrace in mid-1970s. Secondly, the
University of Jos appointed GGa,nn a Research Professor in the Sciences of I æs gretly privileged to I-Eve involved in all those fascinatirg events.
      surprise for at tkE conference ves the arrival of Aba kyanja, Minister of Infomztion ard in President Museveni 's governnent in t-üarEa.      I-Ed h.im to the Jos meeting when he s•.xas in exile in Kenya as a prix.zte attorney. men Museveni captured paer, included Abu kya•uja in his goverment,     thought Aha     not have time to calE to Jos. You can  my astonishment 9.hen - as I    about to sit da•m to breakfast at my Iwuse in Jos - Abu kÜcked ard entered!    embraced in breathless excitarent.
      Other East Africans at       conference included Nuruddin Farah, the Sonzli noxælist, to wi•nn Jos had once been hane. Heold frier&. Like a true  m.wuddin retEirs an incorrigible     After Jos he vent to the Gambia. His latest Pan-African veterirg hole is Tzrtoum in the Sudan. We do miss him at Jos.
Other old frierßs who  to join us at .Jæ for the Htman Rights
     included George Kanyeil-zrü*, Lennel Jomson, Davidson Nicol, Nike Adebiyi, as as Orari H. Kokole. The central to eemine how the three legacies of Africa, Islan ard the b7est the whole idea of hunE1'1 rights. also  the issue of Africa could monitor its om perfornznce in hunnn rights. We certainly had some lively manents.
      Ard yet my mst aplosive malEnt of the year at Jos occurred when I gave a lecture in April on Ibrahim  decision to rake Nigeria a full manber of the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) Nigeria is probably half Muslim and 35% Cluistian, Before 1986 Nigeria was just an otserver of the Islamic Conference.       lecture at Jos was interpreted by a predaninantly Cluistian audience as umuly sympathetic to BabarÜida 8 s move alnut the OIC. Without realiziEÜ it, one Christian lecturer reaffirmed my even-handedness by claimirg that a Muslim conference in Sokoto Ylad earlier burnt anotlær   of mine in protest  vievs! ! The SokDto paper had apparently been a little too favourable to Karl bhrx for the likirg of Islamic fundamentalists! According to the Jos Christian lecturer, my paper vas consigned to the flanes of a bonfire as a heretical exercise! ! I   which paper he    referrirg to. But I Izve not yet got of the alleged Sokoto ceranony of consigz.irg my "&.rxist to the bonfire. I certainly ves not present when the incident
 I am skeptical about the story, bat I am intrigued by the fact that it 9.as circulating even if entirely false!
             
In An-erica charges my alleged 'Ikrxismil from "radically" different sources. television series, The Africans: A Tri le Herita  interpreted by soæ American right-wingers as "&rxist" or "neo-krxist. " Sare of my critics called tlEIEe1ves "Citize-xs for Reagan. Others identified trzrselves with "Accuracy in the &dia. I' In reality both trerßs sere inclined to attribute to my television series a krxåst-inclirztion. I am sure tlzt genuine African Phrxists wuld be amused by this absurd rightwing equation! !
      On tre other Izrd, the television series in Anrerica seened to be me closer to  Muslins tl•nn anything else I ever done before. I travelled fran city to city nation-qide  the ß.7 series. met surprised ho•.J often at the end of each lecture, Muslim  of the audience muld cane to the front to introduce thaselves. tvbst of these sere Black Anericarr Muslim families, complete with Muslim names and often to neirstream denaninations of Islam. I ofta-i deeply moved when I encountered Africa t s Triple Heritage in Black AnErica.
      SatE of the Black American  a special gesture in honaur - rargirg from presenting me with a golden plaque of tribate to me special religious books for my library.
      The positive side of the Anterican response to my TV series vent beyord sectarian considerations. I      greatly privileged that the State of Michigan decided to treat me as a son. Both Houses of the Michigan Legislature paid a special tribute to me and to The Africans. the City of Detroit
(Michigan's largest city) saluted ard the series at a special reception in Detroit.
      In Chic40 Phyor Harold  declared October 6, .1986, "the day of the Africans. " He saluted me at a special celebration of the series in
He also provided rre with a special police escort to acconpany      to O t Hare Airport. I nas greatly honoured, not least because Chicago baas my first base as a professor in Aærica (I vas a Visitirg Professor at the (hiversity of Chicago in 1965) .
Senator ÆÉrry of &ssachusetts dra'.l the attention of the U.S. Senate in
 Washington to the series. Mr. Kerry said inter alia to the SerEte: "While I cannot erdorse all of the conclusions nnde by the participants in the film, its shGdirg has provided a revealing look into the history of the continent of Africa, aryl has provided the Arrerican people with an all-too-rare look at Africa from an African r s perspective. "
      The ræt of my   tour for the television series rarged from Honolulu in
Hasaaii to the Virgin &inlarxi stops included          York, V%äshington,
Los ArÜe1es, Denver, Houston, Atlanta, Chicago, Cleveland, Coll.nnbus, Detroit, Phi Idlelphia, Flint, Providence, Portlard, Oregon. It vas a tremerdous opportunity to meet such a diversity of vieers audiences. At every place I delivered a lecture on Africa!s triple ard gave intervieæ to television ard  It has been exhilaratirg - but also utterly
Soon after the  of tlE last episode of "The Africans,
Jesse Jackson, the Afroan•eråcan leader, phoned me at Inne. "Ali, you did it, net-I! Great program! You did it, Buddy! He  from kshirgton  leavirg for Japan not lorg aftewards, I i.'.zs flattered by his enthusiasn  ard by the fact tlEt found tine to call in the midst of preparirg for a lorg trip! Bon voyage!
      three tmiversities of Michigarx, Jos, arxl Cornell *Ere very tolerant about all this excitanent ard mobility. It sans agreed with Cornell that my first visit to the canpus 901.1-ld be postponed tmtil 1987. TYE University of Michigan hosted a      conference on the theiE of "Ali     : s Africa" with scholars invited fran outside, Prexident Harold Sknpiro of Michigan also held a nejor reception in my honour      The Africans. The Vice-CYlance110r of Jæ, Professor O.C. Onazi, continued to be supportive       helpful even from afar.
       teaching units at Michigan ard Jos vere very cooperative as I traversed the vorld. The       of Political Science in Ann Arbor ard Jos arxfl the successive Directors of tlæ Center for Afroamerican ard African Studies at Michigan pere all exceptionally supportixje - as Vere my Deans in Nigeria the United States. The secretarial staff also contributed their share to The Africas. The four-der president of my country,   Jomo Kenyatta, once gave us a natioæl rx)tto. He proclaimed Harambee, *lich means "let us pull
" Believe me, there Vere a lot of Harambee heroes heroines thæe scenes of 'Itie Africans! My gratitude to them all.
Joe Nye arde I rediscovered each other when he invited ne to go to the
Kennedy School at Harvard to n•ak.e a presentation on "Superpoeger Ethics: A
Third Bbrld " Our television project seriously casidered the
 me at that sanirer at Haward. But in the em we
&cided it t.•ould be more authentic if I ves filned  at either Jos or Ann Arbor instead. I   filnEd both in the library at Jos am in class at Michigan.
   'I'lære a strarge reaction to the TV series an.org sone "Professional bhzrui-Bashers It ( mos) in  They thought the British Broadcasting Corporation had camissioned nee to do "The Africans" as a  response to Basil Davidson's serie called "Africa" transmitted on CFE.nne1 4 the previous year! Can you imagine? In fact, the idea of nv doirg a series for the Bæ first raised when I  the BBC Reith Lectures (Radio) pay back in 1979. 'I'm years later David Harrison ard John Reynolds wrote to  nnre directly about a  BBC series on Africa with myself as the story teller. The tvo of then subsequently came to the U.S.A. to discuss the netter further. The true stimulus of my series ses therefore not Basil Davidson's "Africa. " It vas my BBC Reith Lectures (The African Cordition) . Irxfleed, sane of television programes in the series bear emctly the same titles as satE of Reith lectures ( "A Garden of Eden in Decay, " "A Clash of Cultures") . 
            
As for tYE stgestion t%zt my TV series is a  response to Ba.sil t s, that is probably the     preposterous c}Erge of them all.     any alert vieær Yes ætched series could arrive at such a conclusion  the mird. Did the Professiornl Phzrui-Bashers (Ptsßs) just switch off  volune on tlæir 'N sets ard refused to listen to wret I   sayirg?
      Lynne Cheney, QEiræn of tkE Natiorzl for the Hunanities in the USA, reacted in the oppæite extrane. She hit roof wYien she previeæd the series denounced it as "anti-kstern diatribe" ard "pro--ædafy. " Although the contributed n•ore $600,000 tov,ä.rds production, bf'S. Cheney (a appointee wife of one of President Reagan's in Corgress) insisted tlEt the rearre removed fran the credits of the series. me An•erican Right Wirg as a whole vas ara..tsed to new levels of irxiigrntion Rablic in the U.S.A. "The Africans" b<hibit A in the Rightwing's case agairst the Public Broadcastirg Service (as "too liberal" ard t hx-patriotic") .
     decidai to sell the family house in Ann    at 1517 C*élls Street.
For all of us it nnrked the eryfl of an era. We      the I-iouse in Burns Park  first settled here in 1974. The divorce settlement in 1982 harded over the ln.zse to b611y since she also Izd custody of our three sons. 'I%iis year the last of the boys out - ard ly decided to rove to a 3'1E11er plaæ.    shall all miss 1517   Is - once a nest for all our children, once a Flabitat for a family in its last years together.
      Saul Order bdels Project I have rediscovered each other. I the team at Princeton on "World Order and the Leisure Revolution. " Doz the epansion of leisure hours help or prospects for a viable s•orld order? do yau think?
A lot of &kerere fria-ds Izve resurfaced as a result of my TV series.
 I-eve rediscovered each other. Particularly razrkable is the 
Of an old dear partner at &kerere, Gwen Ptlntosh. She Bill were frierxis of for years. Q,len also yorked for re as a secretary until the stork arrived with a baby one day. Providence gave tYE McIntoshes children. Gen decided to be a full tine after tet - I lost professiorzl pillar.
      If Gæn McIntosh ses the first persorzl American secretary I had in nv career, Judy Baugrm has    the latest. I Izve been fortunate in the secretarial quality I have enjoyed osxer the years - high standards indeed.
r.hfortunately there is a scranble for excellent secretaries! Judy has received an offer    carmot refuse - not fran a stork (she already has children) but in terms of within tlE tmiversity structure. We wish

her continuing success. srell miss not only her sterlirg secretarial skills - but also her enomnus reserves of good will and good hunna.r. VQ•ren her rz•.7 enployer phoned me for a confidential report on Judy, I t:lzt tYE truth -wuld hurt me! Tie truth concerned Judy I s inpressive secretarial paer. I I vas doirg myself out of a partner by praising Judy! I lost out to the rivals!
      M.iclzel Tidy Qizri Kokole gat,æ ræ cojbiderable research help with my latest book The Africans: A Triple Heritage. Michael particularly crucial in the final critical phase of the book. The book quite a success in Britain. It s.•zs on the best-seller's list of the for nzny veeÄ I shocked to learn that it vas the first book by an African to have æde the bestseller I s list! Can you in•agine?
      The book I-las bezi released to the U.S. nErket as well. At the time of writirg this seasonal letter I lax..'e no idea hov.l    tre book is doing in Anerica.  I do   that the publishers reve   run out of copies for retail distributors. But I hope a lot of people serd it out as a Chrisüzs gift !
      Onz.ri ard I are collaboratirg on  piece of right - a chapter aknut the risé a-xl fall of democracy in t-äanda prospects for the future. The chapter is for a project æsed at Stanford University. The target is a book about  in developing cc:mtries, edited by Larry  Seyn•ma.r Ivhrtin Lipset. The African section will include aperience, written by Kokole ard &zrui.
      Zimbab•e decided to show The Africans series durirg the of sunnit of the norzligxed countries in Harare in August 1986. The
Ministry of Information of Zimbabb.e had infornEd me about this plan well in but I did not get a confirnztion until I on a plane with Jesse Jaclcon am his entourage after tlæir Southern African tour. I joined the flight in ragos, bound for Nag York. It vas from Jesse Jackson's colleagues tlzt I learnt that '*The Africans" s.•as beirg shos.•m in Zimbab•E when they thaselves there.
      As far as I     the on.ly other African country to have actually shown t:lE series so far is     wtiåch YEd itsel f been of assistance with the
 The series vnuld Izve been shG•m in cotmtries by na.q but for some legal problas that the BBC to sort out firnlize before further

distributirg the film. I that the countries which are negotiatirg for the series is in spite of the larguage barrier. Their interest is 
One of my deepest regrets of 1986 is tret I did not call on Cheikh Anta
Diop, the great Senegalese thinker, when I v,as in Senegal earlier in the year.
I vas .in Dakar  a meetirg of the I-NESCO Project on trie Scientific ard Cultural History of lvhnkird. Cheikh Anta did not himself the meeting, but he sent a persornl message of greetirgs. I a reciprocal  back. If I k•nwn he be dead a fa•7 weels later, I pould have  it a point to call on CIEikY1 Anta persorzlly to pay my respects. Alas, a  opporttmity to say farevell to a great nzn!
      Haever, I must still be grateful for the fact tret Cheil&l Anta Diop ard I met either in Afriæ or in France alnnst esotery year in the last ten years of his life. He a great Renaissance figure - philosopher, historian, *lysicist ard ga•eral ran of letters. His death leaves a major void in the vorld of scholarship. It also creates a void in Africa's saisibilities. Cheikh Anta had an  capacity to us proud of our past. On one ocæsion, after a lecture at the University in Kinsl-nsa, the students in the audience ære so ecstatic in pr6ud enthusiasm tYEt they carried Cheikh Anta (a big nzn) slÜ..üder high! ! Sheer echilarat.ion!
            
"Ali in a wheel " Yes, that is one of try rænDries of 1986! I travelled all over Africa, hills, rivers, scranblirg on roclG. I lad a tumble or in "wildest" Africa! But it v•.as at Colunbus Airport, Columbus, Ohio, that I I-ed my mrst accident - a "mini- disaster" on an escalator! TYE pain bes so great cm my foot ard ankle that I pas convinced the danzge vas truly serious. Fortunately the  though  me to a *Eelclzir for a *iile, pemitted ne to 11Eet nDst of the RE30r speakirg  across the country. Airline ard hotels to be alerted about my wheelcrzir needs. Ard in a nunber of cities discoæred they had to be fit enough to carry huge wei$lt physically steps! I discovered helpless a hunnn can be. But I also discovered what friends are truly for. bles all ot.ar friems. I am an my feet - I rn rEed to gis.e lectures fran a wheel c.YEir!
One of the  thirgs about the erd of a project is the dispersal .
Manbers go tEir different A's. On the British side I am already nostalgic for t:lE of David Harrison, Peter Tim Copestalæ, Jenny Cathcart ard Judy (as a researcher æs the "Judy-a-Christian" authority) . There of course also the effem.zescent Caroline Pblfe, the  nEmber of our team. Destiny brou$it us together for a nunber of years on a single project - becar1E dear frier& *ile project lasted. Phny of the camera, sourd editirg ænbers of tkE team are also genuinely missed.
      in Aærican team I "ork.ed lorgest with sere (%nrles Hobson ard Diana Frarlk on locatim Ellen Casey Toby Lee.'ire in Väshington. ChristoN'1er (Kit) Roberts at Michigan a nember of the team in a different sense. In the firnl pranotion of tYE seriæ I æs especially by Rannæ Hanæ Jan DuPlain. I remain truly ard deeply ir&bted to all.
      V'ärd Clznberlin, President of ETA, pas a taer of strergth in the face of the Rightwirg onslaught -in the U.S.A. He stood     to    counted - at some risk to his channel. I full of aåniration. Elliott Skimer at Colunbia thiversitxr    also rost suprortive.
The Nigerian Television Authority (NTA) vans deeply involved in the
 We all got  close to Allzji Adegbayega Arulogun - a great Nigerian television expert. Very lively too! Bless him! On location  Vere also helped by Soji Oyinsem, also an NEA producer.
      Partly as a gesture to the BBC   partly in stæport of "Elhe Africans, Bassan Abdullah permitted me to live for several months in his flat in London. It 9.as an arrargetEnt negotiated between him arid the BBC. His mother kept a friendly supervisory eye. The family is partly Egyptian and partly Lebariese. Bassan l s library vas most useful for our Triple Heritage thane in the TV series. The beautiful flat neede an enormous difference to my n•orale in London at a time when Ylours of s.•ork were very long and very arduous.
      But in the midst of all these exertions, my reponsibilities to the tntESCO General History of Africa reve suffered. I am bchird in my editorial duties. I an acutely embarrassed - and must nz.ke speedy Apologies to all concemed.
If you are still  this "post-nnrtan" on a kzrui year, let re

corgratulate you on your resilience, It you have a resplerdent year akiea:i of you aryl your .10ved ones.
Yours
Ali A.
AAM/jeb
is an encouragirg sign. I am sure - God willirg. Best wishes to you
'•armly,
Whzrui
