DRAFT: July 2013
THE ARAB AWAKENING AND THE TURKISH UNREST
By
Ali A. Mazrui
Director, Institute of Global Cultural Studies and 
Albert Schweitzer Professor in the Humanities
Binghamton University
State University of New York at Binghamton, New York, U.S.A.
Albert Luthuli Professor-at-Large 
University of Jos, Jos, Nigeria
Andrew D. White Professor-at-Large Emeritus and Senior Scholar in Africana Studies 
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, U.S.A.
Senior Fellow
Prince Alwaleed Bin Talal Center for Muslim-Christian Understanding Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA
Part of presentation at the International Institute of Islamic Thought, Herndon, Virginia, July 1, 2013.
      The modern Arab Spring flowered in Tunisia in 2010 and in Egypt in 2011. The Turkish Republic was affected indirectly by the Arab Spring, and was particularly disrupted by the Syrian Civil War and the flow of Syrian refugees into Turkey from 2012 onwards.
      This paper compares the original Arab awakening of 2011 with the unrest in the Turkish Republic in the second half of 2013. But we shall also explore the original impact of Mustapha Kemal Ataturk and the legacy which followed after his revolution.
      We hope to demonstrate that Ataturk's Turkey was a case of a Muslim society democratized from above - whereas Tunisia and Egypt have illustrated attempted democratization from below.
      The first comparison between the Arab awakening and the Turkish unrest will be directly along parallel lines. We shall then retreat into the Ataturk history of democratization from above.

 The Arab AwakeningThe Turkish UnrestContagious political uprising across Boundaries
Multiple state quest for the open society
A Tale of Two Continents-The Afro-Arab Spring
The temporary triumph of Islamist parties: The Muslim Brotherhood and others
The partial demilitarization of politics of Egypt, Tunisia, Libya
Experimenting with Re-Islamization
   A major role of social media for the Original Tahir Square and in Tunisia
Multiple social classes in the Arab awakening
The Egyptian uprising was led by two Cities: Cairo and Alexandria
Two Libyan cities fought each other and caused the assassination of Muammar Gaddafi- Tripoli was defeated by Benghazi with Western help
Declining Arab influence in Africa: Fewer Embassies
The Arab League threw Muammar Gaddafi under the bus in 2012.
Fewer Arab flights to African airports
Declining Arab involvement in African education
Pre-Islamic Female Head of State: Hatshepsut in ancient Egypt [1479 to 1458] BCE. Also Cleopatra IV [69 BCE to 30 BCE] Non-contagious political uprising within Turkey
Single state quest for the open society
A Tale of a bicontinental country- Eurasian Turkey
The triumph of Islamist party-Justice and Development Party (AKP)
The partial demilitarization of politics in Turkey in the last decade
Experimenting with Islamization: Legitimizing the hijab, banning the sale of alcohol between 10 p.m. to 6 a.m., banning sale of alcohol around mosques and school precincts
Wider role of social media with the uprising in 
Taksim
The Turkish middle class predominated in the summer uprising of 2013
The Turkish uprising was led by two cities: Istanbul and Ankara
The political divide of summer 2013 was between protesting rallies in Istanbul and progovernment rallies in Ankara
Expanding Turkish influence in Africa: 34 Embassies
Alliance of Civilizations: Led by Turkey and the United Nations. Turkey vs. Syria
More flights to Africa by Turkish airways
Expanding Turkish involvement in African education
Post-Islamic female Head of State: Tansu Çiller

      The most spectacular example of democratizing a Muslim society from above is still the case of the Ataturk revolution of the 1920s and 1930s. On the other hand, the most spectacular twin cases of trying to democratize a Muslim society from below are, firstly, the popular uprising which overthrew President Zeinal Abedain Ben Ali in Tunisia in January 2011 and, secondly, the popular Tahrir Square revolution in Cairo which succeeded in ousting President Mohammed Hosni Mubarak of Egypt by February 11, 2011.
      Mustafa Kemal Ataturk asked himself in the inter-war years "Can we liberally democratize without culturally Westernizing?" Mustafa Kemal regarded it as a trade-off. To all intents and purposes, Kemalism regarded cultural Westernization as a precondition for liberal democratization and secular modernization.i
      One of the greatest paradoxes of the Ataturk revolution was that he brilliantly saved the political independence of Turkey, and then proceeded to sacrifice the cultural authenticity of his country. Kemalism had reached the conclusion that there had to be a trade-off between political autonomy and cultural authenticity.
      Ataturk was not ashamed of acknowledging that liberal democracy was a Western invention. Turkey therefore had to become as Western as possible in way of life if Turkey was to be democratic in ways of politics and governance.
      The most obvious step towards Kemalist democracy was first and foremost the abolition of the monarchy or sultanate, which was effected in 1922.ii The Sultan fled the country on board a British vessel.iii The Turkish Republic was established a year later towards the end of October 1923.iv
      An opportunity was missed for creating a sovereign Muslim Vatican in a small territory, as the Ottoman Empire disintegrated. The Caliphate had been the nearest approximation to a Muslim Papacy. A small territory could have been created with absolute sovereignty of its own, and a new method devised for electing a new Caliph when the previous incumbent died - the equivalent of a Council of Cardinals in the Roman Catholic Church.
      Unfortunately this supreme opportunity of creating a sovereign Muslim Vatican was squandered away in the 1920s. The Caliphate was abolished on March 3rd, 1924.v
      Just as Italy has been a secular state in spite of having a sovereign Vatican next to Rome, Turkey could have been a secular state even if it saved the Caliphate with its own separate jurisdiction. But it was not to be. Mustafa Kemal saved the sovereign independence of Turkey but terminated the Caliphate once and for all.
                Turkey's     democratization                     from above was simultaneously Turkey's 
Westernization from above. It was also Turkey's secularization and liberalization.
      These three processes were undertaken step-by-step - Westernization, secularization and democratization.
      The year after the abolition of the Caliphate was also the year when public activities of religious sects were banned.vi The dress culture of Turks was compulsorily secularized.vii Wearing religious attire was in 1924 restricted to sanctuaries, monasteries and Mosques.viii
      Steps were also taken to make secular law and jurisprudence supreme from 1926, thus marginalizing much of the Sharia in the lives of ordinary Turks, in spite of their being Muslim.ix
      Dress culture of ordinary folks was also directly affected in 1926 when the Turkish Fez was discouraged and the European hat promoted.x It continued to be believed that democracy needed the soil of Westernization.
      About actual individual names of Turks, Ataturk did not make the mistake of African societies. He avoided adopting Euro-Christian and Jewish names at the expense of indigenous Turkish ones.
      However, Turkish nicknames were abolished - as were personal titles and Ottoman decorations like Bey and Pasha.xi The Surname Law was also passed in 1934 in imitation of European sequence of names, rather than imitating actual European names.xii
On November 24, 1934, Mustafa Kemal himself was given the surname of 
ATATURK - the father of the Turks.xiii The new name was supposed to be a gift from the Turkish people.
      The Kemalist belief persisted that liberal democracy needed the soil of the wider Western culture in order to thrive. Turkey adopted the Western calendar in 1925,xiv the international metric system as early as 1931.xv
      The Kemalist revolution tried to dis-Arabize the Turkish language in vocabulary and alphabet as far as possible.xvi But with regard to numerals the process of Europeanization was indistinguishable from Arabization. After all, the numerals which Europeans use are called "Arabic numerals". Turkey Euro-Arabized its numerate culture in 1928.
      Ataturk also invited the American "Grand Mufti" of liberal progressive education, John Dewey to help reform Turkish schools in major cities and establish linkages between education and preparation for democracy.xvii
      More directly relevant to democratization were Ataturk's ideas about empowering women in the political process. From 1926 the Kemalist revolution started addressing the gender question - including the newly recognized eligibility of women to run for parliamentary elections and be elected to the national legislature.xviii
      The belief persisted that liberal democratization required wider cultural Westernization. In 1928 the Roman alphabet for the Turkish language was introduced to replace the Arabic alphabet.xix
      Institutions were also established to address the national history of Turkey rather than the history of the Ottoman Empire.xx An institution was also established to monitor desired changes in the Turkish language.xxi
      Because of the influence of the Qur'an the Arabic language has been stabilized over a period of fourteen centuries.xxii On the other hand, because of the influence of the Kemalist revolution the Turkish language has changed beyond all recognition in less than a century.xxiii Ottoman Turkish is almost a different language from the modern Turkish of the Republic.xxiv
      One big advantage of democratization from above is the fact that those who have abolished the old order are still there to create the new political order. Ataturk saved the sovereignty of the country, abolished the Sultanate, ended the Caliphate, and then introduced wide-ranging cultural changes in preparation for secularization, Westernization and democratization. Mustafa Kemal Ataturk was President of Turkey from 1923 to 1938.xxv He died in office after fifteen years of neo-democratic and secular changes in Turkey.xxvi
      On the other hand, democratization from below is more effective in ending the old order than in shaping the new one. The protesters in Tunis in January 2011 and in Tahrir Square in Cairo in February 2011 ousted two presidents who had been in power for decades. It was a dramatic achievement. But we still do not know how constructive the protesters of Tunisia and Tahrir will be in shaping the new future.
      The major disadvantage of democratization from above is that even if the changes are genuinely democratic, it is often a case of guided democracy at best - and a case of imposed democracy at worst. Democratization from above begins by being elitist democracy.
      In the Turkish experience a second disadvantage was appointing the Turkish army as the trustee and guardian of both Turkey's secularism and her democracy.xxvii For decades the Turkish military held veto-power in both the general elections and on legislation.xxviii Now the military has declined in Turkey.
      For the first time in the history of the Middle East at least ten Arab countries have witnessed prodemocracy demonstrations in varying degrees of intensity.xxix The uprisings in Tunisia and Egypt have already resulted in ousting dictators who had been entrenched in power for decades. In Libya a third dictator was literally lynched. Other Arab countries may have to avert political collapse with pre-emptive reforms. Never in the history of the 
Arabs have there been so many popular uprisings which seem to be inspired neither by Islam nor by anti-imperialism but in the quest for liberal reforms.
 Research Institutes in Turkey should join the scholarly effort to try and understand both the probable causes and the likely consequences of the most remarkable democratizing political contagion since the collapse of the Soviet Union and of communism in Eastern Europe in the final decade of the twentieth century. A symposium in Istanbul "The Pro-democracy Arab Uprising of 2011" has repeatedly been followed by further research and by publications, probably in both Turkish and Arabic.
      In recent years political scientists have increasingly examined the hypothesis that mature democracies do not go to war against each other.xxx A future war between Germany and France, or between Britain and Italy, is now inconceivable. The question therefore arises whether successful democratization in the Middle East would reduce the propensity for warfare in this volatile region of the world in future decades.
      In the 1920s and 1930s Mustafa Kemal Ataturk embarked on a long term project of democratizing a Muslim society (post-Ottoman Turkey) from above. What the Arab world from the year 2011 is struggling to achieve is the goal of democratizing Muslim societies from below. The long-term consequences may be of vital importance in relations between Israel and the Arabs, between the Muslim world and the United States, and between Islam and Western civilization.
      Institutes in Istanbul are well-placed to participate in the relevant research and scholarship. This tradition has produced not only authors of relevant books and articles. It has also produced leaders in the Study of Islam and Democracy in Turkey, Presidents of Associations of Muslim Social Studies worldwide and scholars who have been to almost every Arab country and met some of their leaders.
      Istanbul's credentials are strong in the effort to promote greater understanding of this new phase in Arab history. Initiatives from Turkey are likely to be an important step forward. While Turkey is receiving Arab refugees, it may also be transmitting democratic ideas to the Arab world. The struggle continues from Tunis to Ankara, from Cairo to Istanbul.

i
FOOTNOTE CITATIONS
 See Baskan, 2010, p. 145. ii Ibid. p. 144. iii See Brill, 1993, p. 662. iv See Rustow, 1968, p. 826, note 29. v See Teitelbaum, 2000, p. 423. vi See Baskan, 2010, p. 145. vii Ibid. viii See Doğaner, 2009, p. 36. ix See Baskan, 2010, p. 145. x See Doğaner, 2009, pp. 38-39. xi See Bayrer, 2010, p. 352. xii See Spencer, R. F., 1961, pp. 205-207. xiii Ibid. p. 206. xiv See Berkes, 1964, p. vii. 
xv See Gopalan et al., 2005, p. 46. xvi See Ayata, 1996, p. 41. xvii See Martin, 2002, p. 337. xviii See Gopalan et al., 2005, p. 46. 
xix Ibid. xx Tahir, 2008, especially pp. 57-58. 
xxi      Ibid. p. 57. 
xxii    As cited in the Encyclopedia Britannica, the Prophet Muhammad received the revelations in Arabic (from Allah through the angel Jibrīl) that formed the Qur'an in the cave of Ḥīrā from 610 to 629 CE; additionally, in 632 CE, the Prophet Muhammad died. Therefore, nearly fourteen centuries have traversed between this early period in the 7th century and the 21st century during which the Arabic language has been preserved and stabilized. 
xxiii  For further reading on the Kemalist Revolution language reforms see Tachau, 1964, pp. 191-204; and Baskan, 2010, p. 147. 
xxiv  Ibid. 
xxv    For further reading about the presidential tenure of Mustafa Kemal Ataturk see Rustow, 1968, 793-828. xxvi Ibid. 
xxvii    For further reading on the role of the Turkish military as established during the Kemalist Revolution see Tachau & Heper, 1983, pp. 17-33; and Perlmutter, 1969, p. 392. 
xxviii  Ibid. 
xxix       These prodemocracy demonstration country sites include: Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, Syria, Yemen, Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, Algeria, Lebanon and Jordan (others include: Iraq, Morocco and Oman). For one compilation on the 2010-2011 prodemocracy demonstrations in Arab and non-Arab majority countries see CNN special "Unrest in the Middle," February 18, 2011. xxx See Huntington, 1996, p. 6.
BLIOGRAPHY
Ayata, S. (1996, Winter). Patronage, Party, and State: The Politicization of Islam in Turkey. The Middle East Journal, Vol. 50, No. 1, pp. 40-56.
Baskan, B. (2010, April). What made Ataturk's reforms possible?. Islam and Christian-Muslim Relations, Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 143-156.
Bayrer, R. L. (2010). Free people, free markets: Their evolutionary origins. Washington, DC: New Academia Pub.
Berkes, N. (1964). The development of secularism in Turkey. Montreal: McGill University Press.
Doğaner, Y. (2009, Autumn). The Law on Headdress and Regulations on Dressing in the Turkish Modernization. Bilig, No. 51, pp. 33-54.
E. J. Brill's first Encyclopaedia of Islam: 1913-1936. (1993). (E. J. Brill's first Encyclopaedia of Islam, 5-6.) Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Gopalan, S., Kavas, A., & Nelson, R. (2005). Gaining a Perspective on Turkish Value Orientations: Implications for Expatriate Managers. In B. Maniam (ed.), Journal of International Business Research, Vol. 4, No. 2, pp. 43-56.
Huntington, S. P. (1996). Democracy for the Long Haul. Journal of Democracy, Vol. 7, No. 2, pp. 3-13.
Martin, J. (2002). The education of John Dewey: A biography. New York: Columbia University Press.
Muhammad. (2011). In Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved from http://www.britannica. com /EBchecked/topic/396226/Muhammad
Perlmutter, A. (1969, April). The Praetorian State and the Praetorian Army: Toward a Taxonomy of Civil-Military Relations in Developing Polities. Comparative Politics, Vol. 1, No. 3, pp. 382- 404.
Qurʾān. (2011). In Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved from http://www.britannica. com/EBchecked/topic/487666/Quran
Rustow, D. A. (1968, Summer). Atatürk as Founder of a State. Daedalus, Vol. 97, No. 3, pp. 793-828.
Spencer, R. F. (1961, Autumn). The Social Context of Modern Turkish Names. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, Vol. 17, No. 3, pp. 205-218.
Tachau, F. (1964, April). Language and Politics: Turkish Language Reform. The Review of Politics, Vol. 26, No. 2, pp. 191-204.
Tachau, F., & Heper, M. (1983, October). The State, Politics, and the Military in Turkey. Comparative Politics, Vol. 16, No. 1, pp. 17-33.
Tahir, G. S. (2008). The politics and poetics of translation in Turkey, 1923-1960. Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Teitelbaum, J. (2000). "Taking Back" the Caliphate: Sharīf Husayn Ibn 'Alī, Mustafa Kemal and the Ottoman Caliphate. Die Welt Des Islams, Vol. 40, No. 3, pp. 412-424.
Unrest in the Middle East and North Africa - country by country. (2011, February 18). CNN. Retrieved from http://edition.cnn.com/2011/WORLD/meast/02/15/arab. region.unrest/index.html
