 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DRAFT: 
NOVEMBER 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE GLOBALIZATION OF AN AFRICAN MUSLIM: 
ALI A. MAZRUI BETWEEN GLOBALIZATION 
AND THE TRIPLE HERITAGE 
 
A Biographical Project 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preliminary thoughts for discussion with Mr. Abubaker Y. Ahmed al Shingieti during his visit to Binghamton for discussion with Dr. Seifudein Adem in consultation with Dr. Ali A. Mazrui, November 12-14, 2010. 
 
The Globalization of an African Muslim: Ali A. Mazrui Between Globalization and
Alternative Narratives for the Mazrui Biography 
(a)  The Globalization of an African Muslim: Mazrui from the Indian Ocean to the North Atlantic 
(b)  Ali Mazrui and the Convergence of Civilizations: Africanity, Islam and the 
West 
(c)  Is Ali A. Mazrui a Latter Day Ibn Khaldun? 
 
Alternative Media for the Mazrui Biography 
(a)  Two print volumes-one volume mainly biographical and the second an analytical evaluation of Ali Mazrui's actual scholarly output. 
(b)  One-hour DVD documentary (possibly with Wachanga) or a mini-series of two episodes. One episode to be professional biography; second episode consisting of opinions of other scholars about Mazrui's contribution to Islamic and African studies. 
(c)  A compilation of the works of Ali A. Mazrui on Islam and Comparative Civilizations. Consult the 3 volumes of select Mazruiana published as part of Toyin Falola's project about major 20th-century contributors to African Studies. 
The Globalization of an African Muslim: Ali A. Mazrui Between Globalization and
1
Mazrui's Early Education: Initiation into Islamic Culture and Arab 
Civilization 
(a)  Upbringing in the home of the Chief Kadhi of Kenya, Sheikh Al-Amin Ali 
Mazrui [young Ali's Dad]. 
(b)  Education in Arab Primary and Secondary Schools, Mombasa, Kenya 
(1938-1945). 
(c)  Private tutors on the Arabic language and Islamic studies, in Mombasa, Kenya (1942-1947). 
(d)  Employment in the Mombasa Institute of Muslim Education, Kenya, as 
Warden of Halls of Residence (1948-1955). 
(e)  Education at the Huddersfield Technical College, Huddersfield, Yorkshire-including learning world history, geography, English literature and the Arabic language (1955-1957). 
(f)   Education at the University of Manchester, England, on politics, philosophy and the Arabic language-resulting in Bachelor of Arts with Distinction (1957-1960). 
(g)  Education at Columbia University, New York, on a Rockefeller Foundation fellowship, resulting in a Master's degree in Government and Politics in Africa, the Middle East and North-South Relations (1960-1961). 
(h)  Education at the University of Oxford, Oxford, England, specializing in politics and political philosophy, culminating in a D.Phil. (Oxon) [Doctor of Philosophy-1960-1966] 
The Globalization of an African Muslim: Ali A. Mazrui Between Globalization and
2
